
Table of Contents
Cover
Table of Contents
Title Page
Copyright Page
Preface
Part 1. Masking
Chapter 1. Introduction to Masking
1.1. An overview of masking
1.2. The effect of masking on side-channel leakage
1.3. Different types of masking
1.4. Code-based masking: toward a generic framework
1.5. Hybrid masking
1.6. Examples of specific maskings
1.7. Outline of the part
1.8. Notes and further references
1.9. References
Chapter 2. Masking Schemes
2.1. Introduction to masking operations
2.2. Classical linear operations
2.3. Classical nonlinear operations
2.4. Mask refreshing
2.5. Masking S-boxes
2.6. Masks conversions
2.7. Notes and further references
2.8. References
Chapter 3. Hardware Masking

3.1. Introduction
3.2. Category I: td + 1 masking
3.3. Category II: d + 1 masking
3.4. Trade-offs
3.5. Notes and further references
3.6. References
Chapter 4. Masking Security Proofs
4.1. Introduction
4.2. Preliminaries
4.3. Probing model
4.4. Robust probing model
4.5. Random probing model and noisy leakage model
4.6. Composition
4.7. Conclusion
4.8. Notes and further references
4.9. References
Chapter 5. Masking Verification
5.1. Introduction
5.2. General procedure
5.3. Verify: verification mechanisms for a set of variables
5.4. Explore: exploration mechanisms for all sets of
variables
5.5. Conclusion
5.6. Notes and further references
5.7. Solution to Exercise 5.1
5.8. References
Part 2. Cryptographic Implementations
Chapter 6. Hardware Acceleration of Cryptographic Algorithms ..
6.1. Introduction

6.2. Hardware optimization of symmetric-key cryptography
6.3. Modular arithmetic for hardware implementations
6.4. RSA implementations
6.5. Post-quantum cryptography
6.6. Conclusion
6.7. Notes and further references
6.8. References
Chapter 7. Constant-Time Implementations
7.1. What does constant-time mean?
7.2. Low-level issues
7.3. Primitive implementation techniques
7.4. Constant-time algorithms
7.5. References
Chapter 8. Protected AES Implementations
8.1. Generic countermeasures
8.2. Secure evaluation of the SubByte function
8.3. Other functions of AES
8.4. Notes and further references
8.5. References
Chapter 9. Protected RSA Implementations
9.1. Introduction
9.2. Building a protected RSA implementation step by step
9.3. Remarks and open discussion
9.4. Notes and further references
9.5. References
Chapter 10. Protected ECC Implementations
10.1. Introduction
10.2. Protecting ECC implementations and countermeasures
10.3. Conclusion

10.4. Notes and further references
10.5. References
Chapter 11. Post-Quantum Implementations
11.1. Introduction
11.2. Post-quantum encryption and key encapsulation
11.3. Post-quantum signatures
11.4. Notes and further references
11.5. References
Part 3. Hardware Security
Chapter 12. Hardware Reverse Engineering and Invasive Attacks
12.1. Introduction
12.2. Preparation for hardware attacks
12.3. Probing attacks
12.4. Delayering and reverse engineering
12.5. Memory dump and hardware cloning
12.6. Conclusion
12.7. Notes and further references
12.8. References
Chapter 13. Gate-Level Protection
13.1. Introduction
13.2. DPL principle, built-in DFA resistance, and latent side-
channel vulnerabilities
13.3. DPL families based on standard cells
13.4. Technological specific DPL styles
13.5. DPL styles comparison
13.6. Conclusion
13.7. Notes and further references
13.8. References
Chapter 14. Physically Unclonable Functions

14.1. Introduction
14.2. PUF architectures
14.3. Reliability enhancement
14.4. Entropy assessment
14.5. Resistance to attacks
14.6. Characterizations
14.7. Standardization
14.8. Notes and further references
14.9. References
List of Authors
Index
Summary of Volume 1
Summary of Volume 3
End User License Agreement
List of Tables
Chapter 1
Table 1.1. Instantiation of masking schemes through gen...
Chapter 3
Table 3.1. Distribution of output sharing for Example 3.1
Chapter 12
Table 12.1. Sample preparation methods
Chapter 13
Table 13.1. Exhaustive simulation of all the return to...
Table 13.2. DPL performance and security features overview
Chapter 14
Table 14.1. List of the main PUF types in digital circuits

List of Figures
Chapter 1
Figure 1.1. Generalization of masking schemes under code-based
masking.
Chapter 2
Figure 2.1. The LinearRefreshMasks algorithm, with the randoms
r...
Figure 2.2. Recursive definition of...
Figure 2.3. Sequential computation of x254
Figure 2.4. The sequence of gadgets of high order Boolean to...
Chapter 3
Figure 3.1. Second output share of ISW with n = 2
Figure 3.2. Example of a glitch in the signal xy.
Figure 3.3. Adversarial model with glitch-extended probes
Chapter 4
Figure 4.1. Illustration of (de)composition
Figure 4.2. Composition of two t-NI gadgets.
Figure 4.3. Composition of a t-SNI gadget and a t-NI gadget.
Figure 4.4. xor gate with a single share for each input
Figure 4.5. Parallel (left) and sequential (right) composition of
two gadgets
Chapter 6
Figure 6.1. Comparison of the implementation properties of
ASICs...
Chapter 8
Figure 8.1. Bit-sliced AES S-box where (B7, B6...

Figure 8.2. Bit-sliced AES inv S-box where (B7, B6...
Chapter 9
Figure 9.1. RSA-CRT pseudo-code
Figure 9.2. Protected RSA-CRT pseudo-code
Chapter 10
Listing 10.1. fe25519_cswap function
Chapter 12
Figure 12.1. IronKey device before and after opening its metal
case
Figure 12.2. IronKey device before and after epoxy removal.
Figure 12.3. Omnipod PCB before and after components removal.
Figure 12.4. eMMC package carrier at different depth of
polishing.
Figure 12.5. Four PCB layers extracted with X-ray CT of Infineon
Trust B...
Figure 12.6. Device prepared for non-invasive attack.
Figure 12.7. Decapsulated dies with Aluminum and gold wires.
Figure 12.8. Decapsulated die with copper wires.
Figure 12.9. Decapsulated dies bonded after invasive
preparation.
Figure 12.10. Device prepared for semi-invasive attack.
Figure 12.11. Thinning substrate on lapping machine.
Figure 12.12. Debug interface wired to the microcontroller.
Figure 12.13. Probing station (a) and probing needles landed on
the chip surface...
Figure 12.14. Probing tips landed on the data bus of the chip.
Figure 12.15. Optical and SEM images of test points created
under FIB.

Figure 12.16. 1 μm (a) and 0.5 μm (b) chip after its top layer
was...
Figure 12.17. Surface of the chip after lapping: (a) corner; (b)
logic area.
Figure 12.18. Surface of the chip after CMP: (a) corner; (b) logic
area.
Figure 12.19. Surface of the chip after RIE: (a) corner; (b) logic
area.
Figure 12.20. Optical and SEM images of the logic area after
selective...
Figure 12.21. Layers in 0.35 μm chip: (a) metal 3; (b) metal 2;...
Figure 12.22. Reverse engineering phases: (a) SEM overlay
image;...
Figure 12.23. Examples of deprocessed mask ROMs: (a) wet
etching to metal 1;...
Figure 12.24. Examples of stained mask ROMs: (a) deprocessed
NOR ROM;...
Figure 12.25. Flash area SEM imaging in 90-nm chip: (a)
conventional image;...
Chapter 13
Figure 13.1. WDDL AND gate with the early evaluation flaw
Figure 13.2. (a) Genuine DRSL AND gate and (b) a glitch-free
variant
Figure 13.3. Signal levels in a DRSL AND gate while it returns to
precharge in a...
Figure 13.4. Timing optimization in DPL protocol when the
precharge is...
Figure 13.5. Combinatorial function 
 in (a)
unprotected...

Figure 13.6. Chronogram of execution of the netlist depicted in
Figure...
Figure 13.7. Pairwise balance of dual-rail pairs in a DPL netlist
Figure 13.8. Example of netlist (e.g. one half of a WDDL
netlist)....
Figure 13.9. Schematic of the QDI secured (aka SecLib) AND
gate (left)...
Figure 13.10. True half of the AND gate in LBDL
Chapter 14
Figure 14.1. PUF concept, from design to fabrication.
Figure 14.2. Process variation in MOSFET transistor.
Figure 14.3. Block diagram of a PUF circuit
Figure 14.4. Generic architecture of PUF.
Figure 14.5. Architecture of a PUF circuit in its real environment.
Figure 14.6. Strong versus weak PUF.
Figure 14.7. The two phases of the weak PUF lifecycle.
Figure 14.8. Contact PUF.
Figure 14.9. SRAM cell with cross-coupled inverters and device
fingerprint...
Figure 14.10. Cross-couple latch: A basic building block for
memory-based PUFs
Figure 14.11. Butterfly PUF
Figure 14.12. Arbiter PUF
Figure 14.13. Arbiter PUF with identical delay chain
Figure 14.14. RO- PUF
Figure 14.15. Loop-PUF
Figure 14.16. PUF fuzzy extraction of a key by means of ECC and
secure sketch

Figure 14.17. The fuzzy extractor for key generation
Figure 14.18. BER with and without challenges filtering.
Figure 14.19. Different entropy types for a delay PUF with n ≤ 10
bits.
Figure 14.20. Distribution of 2n PUF responses into the set...
Figure 14.21. The four dimensions involved in the PUFs metrics.
OceanofPDF.com

SCIENCES
Computer Science,
Field Director – Jean-Charles Pomerol
Cryptography, Data Security,
Subject Head – Damien Vergnaud
Embedded Cryptography 2
Coordinated by
Emmanuel Prouff
Guénaël Renault
Matthieu Rivain
Colin O’Flynn
OceanofPDF.com

First published 2025 in Great Britain and the United States by ISTE Ltd and John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or review, as
permitted under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, this publication may only be
reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form or by any means, with the prior permission in writing
of the publishers, or in the case of reprographic reproduction in accordance with the terms and
licenses issued by the CLA. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside these terms should be sent to
the publishers at the under mentioned address:
ISTE Ltd
27-37 St George’s Road
London SW19 4EU
UK
www.iste.co.uk
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
111 River Street
Hoboken, NJ 07030
USA
www.wiley.com
© ISTE Ltd 2025
The rights of Emmanuel Prouff, Guénaël Renault, Matthieu Rivain and Colin O’Flynn to be
identified as the authors of this work have been asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the author(s), contributor(s) or editor(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of ISTE Group.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2024945128
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-78945-214-3
ERC code:
PE6 Computer Science and Informatics
PE6_5 Security, privacy, cryptology, quantum cryptography
OceanofPDF.com

Preface
Emmanuel PROUFF1, Guénaël RENAULT2, Matthieu RIVAIN3
and Colin O’FLYNN4
1LIP6, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France
2Agence nationale de la sécurité des systèmes d’information, Paris,
France
3CryptoExperts, Paris, France
4Dalhousie University and NewAE Technology Inc, Halifax, Canada
The idea for this project was born during a discussion with Damien
Vergnaud. Damien had been asked to propose a series of volumes covering
the different domains of modern cryptography for the SCIENCES series.
He offered us the opportunity to take charge of the Embedded
Cryptography books, which sounded like a great challenge to take on. In
particular, we thought it was perfectly timely as the field was gaining
increasing importance with the growing development of complex mobile
systems and the Internet of Things.
The field of embedded cryptography, as a research domain, was born in the
mid-1990s. Until that time, the evaluation of a cryptosystem and the
underlying attacker model were usually agnostic of implementation aspects
whether the cryptosystem was deployed on a computer or on some
embedded hardware like a smart card. Indeed, the attacker was assumed to
have no other information than the final results of a computation and,
possibly, the corresponding inputs. In this black box context, defining a
cryptanalytic attack and evaluating resistance to it essentially consisted of
finding flaws in the abstract definition of the cryptosystem.
In the 1990s, teams of researchers published the first academic results,
highlighting very effective means of attack against embedded systems.
These attacks were based on the observation that a system’s behavior during
a computation strongly depends on the values of the data manipulated
(which was previously known and exploited by intelligence services).
Consequently, a device performing cryptographic computation does not
behave like a black box whose inputs and outputs are the only known

factors. The power consumption of the device, its electromagnetic radiation
or its running time are indeed other sources that provide the observer with
information on the intermediate results of the computation. Teams of
researchers have also shown that it was possible to disrupt a computation
using external energy sources such as lasers or electromagnetic pulses.
Among these so-called physical attacks, two main families emerge. The
first gathers the (passive) side-channel attacks, including timing attacks
proposed by Kocher in 1996 and power analysis attacks proposed by
Kocher et al. in 1999, as well as the microarchitectural attacks which have
considerably developed after the publication of the Spectre and Meltdown
attacks in 2018. This first family of attacks focuses on the impact that the
data manipulated by the system have on measurable physical quantities
such as time, current consumption, or energy dissipation related to state
changes in memories. The second family gathers the (active) fault injection
attacks, whose first principles were introduced by Boneh et al. in 1997.
These attacks aim to put the targeted system into an abnormal state of
functioning. They consist, for example, of ensuring that certain parts of a
code are not executed or that operations are replaced by others. Using
attacks from either of these families, an adversary might learn sensitive
information by exploiting the physical leakage or the faulted output of the
system.
Since their inception, side-channel attacks and fault injection attacks, along
with their countermeasures, have significantly evolved. Initially, the
embedded systems industry and a limited number of academic labs
responded with ad hoc countermeasures. Given the urgency of responding
to the newly published attacks, these countermeasures were reasonably
adequate at the time. Subsequently, the invalidation of many of these
countermeasures and the increasing sophistication of attack techniques
highlighted the need for a more formalized approach to security in
embedded cryptography. A community was born from this observation in
the late 1990s and gathered around a dedicated conference known as
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems (CHES). Since then, the
growth of this research domain has been very significant, resulting from the
strong stake of the industrial players and the scientific interest of the open
security issues. Nowadays, physical attacks involve state-of-the-art
equipment capable of targeting nanoscale technologies used in the

semiconductor industry. The attackers routinely use advanced statistical
analyses or signal processing, while the defenders designing
countermeasures calls on concepts from algebra, probability theory, or
formal methods. More recently, and notably with the publication of the
Spectre and Meltdown attacks, side-channel attacks have extended to so-
called microarchitectural attacks, exploiting very common optimization
techniques in modern CPUs such as out-of-order execution or speculative
execution. Twenty-five years after the foundational work, there is now a
large community of academic and industrial scientists dedicated to these
problems. Embedded cryptography has gradually become a classic topic in
cryptography and computer security, as illustrated by the increasing
importance of this field in major cryptography and security conferences
besides CHES, such as CRYPTO, Eurocrypt, Asiacrypt, Usenix Security,
IEEE S&P or ACM CCS.
Pedagogical material
For this work, it seemed important to us to have both scientifically
ambitious and pedagogical content. We indeed wanted this book to appeal
not only to researchers in embedded cryptography but also to Master’s
students interested in the subject and curious to take their first steps. It was
also important to us that the concepts and notions developed in the book be
as illustrated as possible and therefore accompanied by a pedagogical base.
In addition to the numerous illustrations proposed in the chapters, we have
made pedagogical material available (attack scripts, implementation
examples, etc.) to test and deepen the various concepts. These can be found
on the following GitHub organization:
https://github.com/embeddedcryptobook.
Content
This book provides a comprehensive exploration of embedded
cryptography. It comprises 40 chapters grouped into nine main parts, and
spanning three volumes. The book primarily addresses side-channel and
fault injection attacks as well as their countermeasures. Part 1 of Volume 1
is dedicated to Software Side-Channel Attacks, namely, timing attacks and
microarchitectural attacks, primarily affecting software; whereas Part 2 is

dedicated to Hardware Side-Channel Attacks, which exploit hardware
physical leakages, like power consumption and electromagnetic
emanations. Part 3 focuses on the second crucial family of physical attacks
against embedded systems, namely, Fault Injection Attacks.
A full part of this volume is dedicated to Masking in Part 1, which is a
widely used countermeasure against side-channel attacks and which has
become an important research topic since their introduction in 1999. This
part covers a variety of masking techniques, their security proofs and their
formal verification. Besides general masking techniques, efficient and
secure embedded cryptographic implementations are very dependent on the
underlying algorithm. Consequently, Part 2, Cryptographic
Implementations, is dedicated to the implementation of specific
cryptographic algorithm families, namely, AES, RSA, ECC, and post-
quantum cryptography. This part also covers hardware acceleration and
constant-time implementations. Secure embedded cryptography needs to
rely on secure hardware and secure randomness generation. In cases where
hardware alone is insufficient for security, we must rely on additional
software techniques to protect cryptographic keys. The latter is known as
white-box cryptography. The next three parts of the book address those
aspects. Part 3 of this current volume, Hardware Security, covers invasive
attacks, hardware countermeasures and physically unclonable functions
(PUF).
Part 1 of Volume 3 is dedicated to White-Box Cryptography: it covers
general concepts, practical attack tools, automatic (gray-box) attacks and
countermeasures as well as code obfuscation, which is often considered as a
complementary measure to white-box cryptography. Part 2 of Volume 3 is
dedicated to Randomness and Key Generation in embedded cryptography.
It covers both true and pseudo randomness generation as well as
randomness generation for specific cryptographic algorithms (prime
numbers for RSA, random nonces for ECC signatures, random errors for
post-quantum schemes).
Finally, we wanted to include concrete examples of real world attacks
against embedded cryptosystems. The final part of this series of books
contains those examples of Real World Applications and Attacks in the
Wild. While not exhaustive, we selected representative examples illustrating

the practical exploitation of the attacks presented in this book, hence
demonstrating the necessity of the science of embedded cryptography.
Acknowledgments
This series of books results from a collaborative work and many persons
from the embedded cryptography community have contributed to its
development. We have tried to cover (as broadly as possible) the field of
embedded cryptography and the many research directions related to this
field. This has not been an easy task, given the dynamism and growth of the
field over the past 25 years. Some experts from the community kindly
shared their insights on the preliminary plan of the book, namely, Sonia
Belaïd, Pierre-Alain Fouque, Marc Joye, Victor Lomné and Yannick Sierra.
We would like to thank them for their insightful comments.
For each of the identified topics we wanted the book to cover, we have
called upon expert researchers from the community, who have honored us
by joining this project. The essence of this work is theirs. Dear Guillaume
Barbu, Lejla Batina, Sonia Belaïd, Davide Bellizia, Florent Bernard, Begül
Bilgin, Eleonora Cagli, Łukasz Chmielewski, Jessy Clédière, Brice
Colombier, Jean-Sébastien Coron, Jean-Luc Danger, Lauren De Meyer,
Cécile Dumas, Jean-Max Dutertre, Viktor Fischer, Pierre Galissant,
Benedikt Gierlichs, Louis Goubin, Vincent Grosso, Sylvain Guilley, Patrick
Haddad, Laurent Imbert, Ján Jančár, Marc Joye, Matthias Kannwischer,
Stefan Katzenbeisser, Victor Lomné, José Lopes-Esteves, Ange Martinelli,
Pedro Massolino, Loïc Masure, Nele Mentens, Debdeep Mukhopadhyay,
Camille Mutschler, Ruben Niederhagen, Colin O’Flynn, Elisabeth Oswald,
Dan Page, Pascal Paillier, Louisa Papachristodoulou, Thomas Peeters,
Olivier Peirera, Thomas Pornin, Bart Preneel, Thomas Prest, Jean-René
Reinhard, Thomas Roche, Francisco Rodríguez-Henríquez, Franck
Rondepierre, Eyal Ronen, Melissa Rossi, Mylene Rousselet, Sylvain
Ruhault, Ulrich Ruhrmair, Sayandeep Saha, Patrick Schaumont, Sebastian
Schrittwieser, Peter Schwabe, Richa Singh, Sergei Skorobogatov, François-
Xavier Standaert, Petr Svenda, Marek Sys, Akira Takahashi, Abdul Rahman
Taleb, Yannick Teglia, Philippe Teuwen, Adrian Thillard, Medhi Tibouchi,
Mike Tunstall, Aleksei Udovenko, David Vigilant, Lennert Wouters, Yuval
Yarom and Rina Zeitoun: thank you so much for the hard work!

To accompany these authors, we also relied on numerous reviewers who
kindly shared their remarks on the preliminary versions of the chapters.
Their behind-the-scenes work allowed us to greatly improve the technical
and editorial quality of the books. We express our gratitude to them,
namely, Davide Alessio, Sébastien Bardin, Sonia Belaïd, Eloi Benoist-
Vanderbeken, Gaëtan Cassiers, Jean-Sebastien Coron, Debayan Das, Cécile
Dumas, Julien Eynard, Wieland Fischer, Thomas Fuhr, Daniel Genkin,
Dahmun Goudarzi, Eliane Jaulmes, Victor Lomné, Loïc Masure, Bart
Mennink, Stjepan Picek, Thomas Pornin, Thomas Prest, Jurgen Pulkus,
Michaël Quisquater, Thomas Roche, Franck Rondepierre, Franck Salvador,
Tobias Schneider, Okan Seker, Pierre-Yves Strub, Akira Takahashi, Abdul
Rahman Taleb, Mehdi Tibouchi, Aleksei Udovenko, Gilles Van Assche,
Damien Vergnaud, Vincent Verneuil and Gabriel Zaid.
October 2024
OceanofPDF.com

PART 1
Masking
OceanofPDF.com

1
Introduction to Masking
Ange MARTINELLI and Mélissa ROSSI
Agence nationale de la sécurité des systèmes d’information, Paris,
France
1.1. An overview of masking
In order to thwart the menace of passive side-channel attacks such as
Differential Power Analysis (DPA) or templates attacks, the most deployed
software countermeasure has been masking since its introduction in 1999.
The main observation is that side-channel attacks use the relation between
intermediates values and leakage traces. Thus, if intermediate values are
independent from any secret, no information can be retrieved from the
leakage. In a nutshell, masking consists of randomizing the intermediate
data, which depend on both the secret values and known variables.
Each secret input x is basically split into d + 1 variables (xi)0≤i≤d referred as
shares: d of them are generated uniformly at random, whereas the last one is
computed such that their combination through some defined operation
reveals the secret value x. The integer d is called masking order.
DEFINITION 1.1.–
Sharing: let  be the finite support of the possible values for a sensitive
variable x. Let 
 be a function. A (d + 1)-uple
 is a sharing of x with respect to the recombination
function F iff:
1. the distribution of all subsets of (x0, …, xd) of size at most d is
statistically independent from x;
2. x = F(x0, …, xd).

The following example gives a method to design a three-sharing of an 8-bit
value with respect to the XOR operation ⊕.
EXAMPLE 1.1. –
To mask an 8-bit value 
 at order 2 with respect to the
recombination function F(x0, x1, x2) := x0 ⊕ x1 ⊕ x2, we can proceed by
generating two values x0 and x1 uniformly at random in 
, and next
defining x2 := x⊕x0⊕x1. That way, the second condition is
automatically validated. For the first condition, any set of two values in
(x0, x1, x2) is indistinguishable from 
 (where 
denotes the uniform distribution in the given finite set) and the same is
verified for singletons. Thus, (x0, x1, x2) is a sharing of x with respect to
operation ⊕.
DEFINITION 1.2.–
Masked scheme: let  be a circuit implementing a cryptographic
scheme; we call masked scheme a scheme  that is functionally
equivalent and where all the sensitive values are manipulated in masked
form.
Note that a masked scheme is not secure by design and designing a masked
scheme could be an error-prone task. Each masked design should be proved
in a security model as will be presented later in Chapter 4 of this volume.
For this purpose, we also define the notion of gadget that corresponds to
sub-algorithms.
DEFINITION 1.3.–
Gadget: a gadget is a probabilistic algorithm that takes shared and
unshared inputs values and returns shared and unshared values.

In practice, while security increases with the masking order, the cost of
masking can be quite heavy, both in terms of circuit size and performances
and increases with the number of shares; thus, most masked scheme
implementations are in first order (i.e. with two shares) or second order (i.e.
with three shares).
1.2. The effect of masking on side-channel
leakage
In general, if the device leaks information on one manipulated variable at a
time, a d-order masking resists to stronger attacks which can combine
information on at most d points of measure. In particular, Chari et al. (1999)
have shown that the number of measurements required to mount a
successful power analysis attack increases exponentially with the number of
shares – see higher order attacks in Chapter 7 of Volume 1. Their model was
considering the very classical case where each manipulated bit is leaking its
noisy value, that is, the sum of its value and a Gaussian noise. Therefore,
the masking order represents a trade-off between security and efficiency.
However, the reader may wonder about the precise theoretical link between
masking and the potential physical leakages. Indeed, the masking
countermeasure protects against an attacker able to obtain at most d
intermediate values with exact precision. This attacker model is called the
d-probing model. Such a model could be far from the reality where the
attacker actually obtains many noisy intermediate values through measured
leakage. We can thus define various leakage models being more realistic,
such as the noisy leakage model, or in which the security of masking is
easier to assess, such as the probing model.
Let us first mention the three prominent leakage models. More details with
formal definitions will be provided later in this chapter.
Probing model: in this model, besides the black-box information of the
cryptosystem, the attacker is able to obtain the actual value (called
“probes”) of at most d exact intermediate values of its choice, where d is a
parameter. Masking allows us to reach provable security in this model.
Random probing model: in this model, besides the black-box information of
the cryptosystem, the attacker has access to each intermediate value with a

certain probability p, where p is a parameter.
Noisy leakage model: in this model, besides the black-box information of
the cryptosystem, the attacker has access to all intermediate values but they
are all noisy. The standard deviation of the noise level is a parameter of this
model.
The precise description and reductions between models will be detailed and
proved in Chapter 4 of this volume. A high level idea that outlines the
power of provable security of masking is as follows: it is possible to derive
bounds on the parameters to move from a model to another. For example, if
a scheme is secure in the probing model with a high d, it will be secure in
the noisy leakage model with a low level of noise.
1.3. Different types of masking
As seen in our Definition 1.1, masking is a very versatile definition that can
be implemented with any recombination function, purposely arbitrarily
denoted as F. The choice of this function has strong repercussions on the
efficiency and the leakage of the overall implementation. For efficiency
matters, an operator that behaves efficiently, typically linearly, when
composed with operations on shares is desirable. However, linear operation
allows for easy recovery with side-channel information. In particular, the
higher the algebraic complexity of the operation, the higher the impact of
the noise on the recombining function, thus the higher the concrete security
against side-channel attacks. In practice, masking is a costly
countermeasure and efficiency matters are prominent. Thus, the vast
majority of the masked schemes involve efficient recombination functions
when composed of the most numerous operations of the cryptographic
algorithm, often linear operations such as XOR, modular additions or
multiplications by scalars. In practice, the two foremost maskings are
Boolean masking and arithmetic masking.
Boolean and arithmetic masking: these families of masking provide the best
trade-off concerning the efficiency and leakage. Main cryptographic
operations are linear with either Boolean or arithmetic maskings. Thus,
even if the leakage could be strong in case of low noise, it is sometimes less

expensive to increase the masking order than to consider another type of
masking with the same order.
DEFINITION 1.4.–
Let  be the support of the possible values for a sensitive variable x. Let
 be a function and 
 a parameter. A Boolean,
respectively, arithmetically, masked value is a sharing as defined in
Definition 1.1 with F(x0, …, xd) := x0 ⊕ … ⊕ xd, respectively, F(x0, …,
xd) := x0 + ⋯ + xd mod q.
Let us remark that the space  is not necessarily a set of integers, and it can
be any set compatible with the recombination function. Commonly, for
example, a sharing can be defined over a polynomial ring like
 for 
. In that case, an arithmetic
masking modulus q is a natural masking solution.
Polynomial masking: this masking leverages the idea behind Lagrange
polynomials: let P be a degree d + 1 polynomial. The knowledge of d + 1
couples (yi, P(yi)) for any all distinct y0, y1 …yd allows us to completely
reconstruct the polynomial P. Conversely, the knowledge of strictly less
than d + 1 couples (yi, P(yi)) gives no information on the actual polynomial.
The principle for masking a sensible value 
 is simple: x is first
embedded in a (d + 1)-degree polynomial 
, typically x is such
that P(0) = x. The shares are therefore defined as d + 1 couples xi = (yi,
P(yi)), and we choose here (1, P(1)), (2, P(2)), …, (d + 1, P(d + 1)). To
recover the polynomial with the knowledge of all the P(i), we can recover
the polynomial through Lagrange’s formula:
Next, we can recombine the secret with F(x0, …, xd) = LP(1),…,P(d+1)(0).

This type of masking has a quite complex recombination function, thus it
intuitively leads to a very low practical leakage while being somehow more
expensive in terms of performance. Indeed, few common cryptographic
operations are linear with a decomposition on polynomial images.
Multiplicative masking: the multiplicative masking consists of applying
F(x0, …, xd) := x0 × ⋯ × xd in Definition 1.1, where the multiplication is
made in the corresponding field . This type of masking can be very well
suited for the SubBytes step of the AES. Indeed, x ↦ x−1 is an
endomorphism of GF(256)*.
Practical activity: Algorithm 1.1 is applying this technique for a field
inversion after an addition of the key to the plaintext. The inversion is
performed in GF(256)* and it is sequentially applied to every byte of the
128-bit state, denoted as S. For the sake of simplicity and because the XOR
operation is outside of the scope of this activity, the masked state S = (S0,
…, Sd) given as input of the algorithm is the masked XOR of the key k and
the plaintext P. The shares S1, … Sd are generated uniformly at random in
(GF(256)*)16 and S0 = x × S1 × ⋯ × Sd. In the additional material, some
traces of this algorithm are provided with the corresponding plaintexts.
They were derived on a ChipWhisperer-Lite Xmega. A high-order side-
channel attack seems tedious; you could exploit a property of multiplicative
masking to recover the whole secret k with a simple first-order DPA (see
Chapter 4 of Volume 1).
Algorithm 1.1.

Inner-product masking and affine masking: as outlined above,
multiplicative masking has some vulnerabilities if not used properly but we
can combine it with a Boolean one as follows.
DEFINITION 1.5.–
Let 
 be a sensitive value, 
 be fixed vector
and 〈·,·〉 be a ⊕-linear inner product defined on . An inner product
masked value is a masked value as defined in Definition 1.1, with:
The particular case of d = 1 and v1 = 1 is called an affine masking.
This masking is slightly less efficient than the Boolean masking because of
the extra multiplication operations but it may offer stronger security as the
leakage can be better de-correlated from the secret. This kind of masking
and the following schemes aim at lowering down the amount of information
which can be recovered from the leakage. They can all offer a better
security/complexity tradeoff in a specific setup.
Leakage squeezing: this consists of applying a different bijection to each
share and proceeds with standard masking – mostly Boolean. The squeezing
functions need to be bijective to recover the plain shares during
computation and to unmask the output. Eventually, first-order Boolean
masking combined with leakage squeezing gives similar security than
masking with two to three more shares for a different complexity, more
suited in hardware.

DEFINITION 1.6.–
Let 
 be a masked sensitive value. Let
(B0, …, Bd) be a set of bijections over . We call leakage squeezing the
application of the Bis over x such that the operated circuit works on
.
Orthogonal direct sum masking: in order to ensure dual security against
both passive and active attacks, masking using error correcting codes has
been proposed as follows.
DEFINITION 1.7. –
Let 
 be a sensitive value and 
 a vector of masks. Let G
and H be generator matrices of two linear codes  and 
 such that
 and 
. We can define the orthogonal
direct sum masking of x as z = xG ⊕ yH, where xG denote the scalar–
vector product and yH the vector–matrix product. We can then recover x
as x = zGT(GGT)−1.
1.4. Code-based masking: toward a generic
framework
While Boolean and arithmetic masking are the most common choices, a lot
of other operations are possible as outlined in section 1.4. Many more
masking recombination functions F have been attempted to improve either
the security in some settings or to provide a more global theoretical
background. In this section, we outline a generalization of the Boolean
masking family. Indeed, the Boolean masking can be seen as a sub-case of
the inner product masking. This can go further: inner product masking is a
sub-case of leakage squeezing (LS), itself generalized as orthogonal direct

sum masking. As a side methodology with some intersections, there stands
polynomial masking.
As an attempt at uniformization, generalized code-based masking has been
introduced to give a common framework to all of these schemes as shown
in Figure 1.1. It has been shown that any other masking scheme outlined in
section 1.4 can be instantiated using generalized code-based masking.
Generalized code-based masking is similar to orthogonal direct sum
masking where  and 
 can be any matrices such that
. Let us define the matrices G and H as
generator matrices of the linear codes  and 
, respectively. Let k be the
dimension of G and t the dimension of H. Table 1.1 gives an overview of
how to parameterize code-based masking to instantiate specific masking.
Table 1.1. Instantiation of masking schemes through generalized code-
based masking
Scheme
Boolean
IP
LS
ODS
Polynomial
GCB
Conditions
(1 0 0 ⋯
0)
(1 0 0
⋯ 0)
(1 1 ⋯ 1)
Parameters k = 1, d = t
+ 1
k = 1, d
= t + 1
d = k +
t
d = k +
t
d ≥ k + t
d ≥ k + t

Figure 1.1. Generalization of masking schemes under code-based masking.
1.5. Hybrid masking
One type of masking is not often suited for a whole cryptographic
algorithm. For example, whereas a multiplicative masking can be well
suited for a SubBytes application corresponding to x ↦ x254 in GF(256), it
is not suited for the addition of the sub-keys in the value (this time linear for
⊕). Furthermore, an arithmetic masking could be perfectly suited for
addition of polynomials in 
 for 
, but it is not
well suited for deriving a masked outcome of a comparison |p| ≥ K for p
being a polynomial coefficient and K being a constant. These cases are very
frequent in cryptographic algorithms. Hence, several types of masking can
be necessary for an efficient masked algorithm. In consequence, conversion
algorithms are necessary. The particularity of these algorithms is the fact
that they are functionally equivalent to the identity function; however, they
take a masked variable as input and return this same variable but masked
with a different type of masking.
There is no generic technique for deriving such algorithms independently of
the types of masking. Efficient conversions are sometimes challenging to
design in a secure way. The case of Boolean to arithmetic conversions will

be depicted later in Chapter 2 of this volume. There also exist less
widespread conversions like multiplicative to Boolean. Some additional
information on these conversions will be pointed out later in the references.
1.6. Examples of specific maskings
Masking is a very powerful countermeasure and is usually implemented
either table-based or directly implementing masked operations.
Nevertheless, some algorithms can be efficiently masked with specific
methods.
As will be detailed in Chapter 9 of this volume, the RSA algorithm has
simple and efficient ways to do exponent blinding to protect the
exponentiation modulo, the product of two primes. This kind of masking
uses a random multiple of the order of the multiplicative group to protect
the exponentiation. The eventual output stays unchanged but the actual
exponent used in the computation is randomized.
Mini-game: let us try to wear the adversary’s shoes. Here are several
masked algorithms, and we assume that they are functionally correct, that
is, the outputs are correctly computed as functions of the inputs. However,
for each algorithm, there is a masking flaw in the probing model
(informally defined earlier in this chapter and formally defined later in
Chapter 4 of this volume). In a masking context, the goal of an adversary
against the masking is to break Definition 1.1. Thus, the goal is to find a
subset of less than d variables, which is correlated to the secret.
1. Here, d = 2. This algorithm is simply computing an XOR of its inputs.
The secret here is a.

Algorithm 1.2.
2. Here, d = 3. This algorithm is computing the multiplication of two
inputs masked in Boolean form. Your goal is to recover a with at most
two intermediate values.
3. In this algorithm, d = 4. This algorithm generates an arithmetic
masking in 
 of a sample whose distribution is centered and
has a small standard deviation. Let us define D as a centered discrete
Gaussian distribution on 
 with a small standard deviation 0.5.
Note that distribution does not correspond to the final one, and the
precise description of the final distribution is not necessary for finding
flaws in this algorithm. Your goal is to find three intermediate
variables that provide some information about the secret, the output c.

Algorithm 1.3.
Algorithm 1.4.
1.7. Outline of the part
Masking is a very powerful tool to generically protect cryptographic
algorithms against side-channel attacks. However, there is an important

tradeoff between efficiency and security with many levels, and it will be the
main subject of this part.
In Chapter 2, several common cryptographic algorithms and functions will
be masked with emphasis on elementary operations.
Chapter 3 of this volume outlines the impact of hardware on masking and
the necessity to take into account physical phenomena like glitches in the
design of masking implementations. Chapter 4 focuses on the various
security models available to prove masking implementations. Eventually,
Chapter 5 gives tools to implement masking schemes on specific algorithms
and to assess their security.
1.8. Notes and further references
Section 1.1. The theory of masking has been seminally introduced in
Goubin and Patarin (1999); Ishai et al. (2003); Goudarzi and Rivain
(2016).
Section 1.2. For more information about the effect of masking on side-
channel leakage, we refer to Chari et al. (1999) and Barthe et al.
(2017), and more information on the different models will be presented
later in the chapter.
Section 1.3. For concrete examples of Boolean, arithmetic and
multiplicative masking, we refer to Rivain and Prouff (2010) and
Genelle et al. (2011).
Section 1.4. For more information and recent works in the domain of
code-based masking, we recommand Bringer et al. (2014); Wang et al.
(2020) and Cheng et al. (2021).
1.9. References
Barthe, G., Dupressoir, F., Faust, S., Grégoire, B., Standaert, F.-X., Strub,
P.-Y. (2017). Parallel implementations of masking schemes and the
bounded moment leakage model. Report 2016/912, Cryptology ePrint
Archive [Online]. Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/912.

Bringer, J., Carlet, C., Chabanne, H., Guilley, S., Maghrebi, H. (2014).
Orthogonal direct sum masking: A smartcard friendly computation
paradigm in a code, with builtin protection against side-channel and fault
attacks. In WISTP. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Chari, S., Jutla, C.S., Rao, J.R., Rohatgi, P. (1999). Towards sound
approaches to counteract power-analysis attacks. In Advances in
Cryptology – CRYPTO’ 99, Wiener, M. (ed.). Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg.
Cheng, W., Guilley, S., Carlet, C., Danger, J.-L., Mesnager, S. (2021).
Information leakages in code-based masking: A unified quantification
approach. IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems, 3, 465–495.
Genelle, L., Prouff, E., Quisquater, M. (2011). Thwarting higher-order side
channel analysis with additive and multiplicative maskings. In
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems – CHES 2011, Preneel,
B. and Takagi, T. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Goubin, L. and Patarin, J. (1999). DES and differential power analysis (the
“duplication” method). In Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded
Systems – CHES 1999, Koç, Ç.K. and Paar, C. (eds). Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg.
Goudarzi, D. and Rivain, M. (2016). On the multiplicative complexity of
Boolean functions and bitsliced higher-order masking. In Cryptographic
Hardware and Embedded Systems – CHES 2016. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg.
Ishai, Y., Sahai, A., Wagner, D. (2003). Private circuits: Securing hardware
against probing attacks. In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2003,
Boneh, D. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Rivain, M. and Prouff, E. (2010). Provably secure higher-order masking of
AES. In Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems – CHES 2010,
Mangard, S. and Standaert, F.X. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Wang, W., Méaux, P., Cassiers, G., Standaert, F.-X. (2020). Efficient and
private computations with code-based masking. IACR Transactions on

Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, 2, 128–171.
OceanofPDF.com

2
Masking Schemes
Jean-Sébastien CORON1 and Rina ZEITOUN2
1University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
2Cryptography & Security Labs, IDEMIA, Courbevoie, France
2.1. Introduction to masking operations
As we have seen in the previous chapter, the main countermeasure against
side-channel attacks is masking. For Boolean masking, it consists of
splitting each variable x into n Boolean shares x = x1 ⊕ x2 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ xn, with
n > t for security against t probes. Initially, the shares are generated
uniformly at random under this condition. For example, we can generate x1,
…, xn−1 randomly and let xn = x ⊕ x1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ xn−1. The shares are then
processed separately in masked operations (also called gadgets) that enable
us to compute the underlying secret variables in a secure way.
2.2. Classical linear operations
A block-cipher such as AES alternates several rounds, each containing some
linear transformations, and some nonlinear transformations. A linear
function y = f(x) is easy to mask when x is shared as x = x1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ xn, as
we have:
so it suffices to compute yi = f(xi) separately for every i, so that we
eventually get y = y1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ yn as required. Consider, for example, the
squaring operation. Since squaring is linear in 
, given as input the
shares xi of x = x1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ xn, we can compute the shares yi of

[2.1]
 simply by
letting 
 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
Similarly, processing the xor operation is straightforward. Given as input
the shares xi and yi of x = x1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ xn and y = y1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ yn, we can obtain
the shares zi of z = x ⊕ y simply by letting zi = xi ⊕ yi for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
2.3. Classical nonlinear operations
As explained above, linear operations are straightforward to mask by
performing computations on each share independently. This is however not
the case for nonlinear operations, which generally require the processing of
all shares together to compute the correct result. To preserve security
against t-th order attack in this context, a dedicated method becomes
necessary, usually involving additional randomness.
In the following, the crucial problem of masking the AND operation is
addressed, as any circuit (at the hardware level) can be implemented using
only the linear XOR gate and the nonlinear AND gate. As a second step, we
describe mask refreshing techniques, which are frequently required to
ensure the security of a full construction when composing many gadgets.
The so-called Ishai, Sahai and Wagner (ISW) scheme securely computes a
sharing of c = a ∧ b from two input sharings (a1, a2, …, an) and (b1, b2, …,
bn) of a and b, respectively, by computing all of the cross-products ai ∧ bj
for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n based on the following equation:
Those n2 products are then recombined in n new shares (c1, c2, …, cn),
including fresh random elements ri,j to ensure security; namely, a
straightforward recombination of the cross-products would not achieve
security against t probes for any t < n.
The ISW scheme is pictured in Algorithm 2.1. It was originally described
over 
. To process an AND gate over {0, 1}k, the algorithm is adapted as

follows: (i) all 1-bit variables defined over 
 are replaced by k-bit
variables defined over {0, 1}k; (ii) the 1-bit XOR operations are replaced by
k-bit XOR operations; and (iii) the 1-bit AND operations are replaced by k-
bit AND operations. This extension still preserves the security of the
original scheme. In line 8, we use brackets to indicate the order of the
operations, as this is mandatory for the security of the scheme. Algorithm
2.1 enables us to securely evaluate the AND operation at the cost of n2
multiplications (which correspond to the n2 cross-products), n(n − 1)/2
random values (which are necessary to perform their secure recombination)
and 2n(n − 1) additions (which allow us to achieve the aforementioned
recombination). Its complexity is therefore 
, with a number of
operations TISW(n) = n(7n − 5)/2.
Algorithm 2.1. SecAnd
2.3.1. Application of ISW algorithm for n = 2 and n = 3
We illustrate the ISW algorithm for n = 2 and n = 3.
For n = 2 with input shares (a1, a2) and (b1, b2), the output shares (c1,
c2) are given as:

For n = 3 with input shares (a1, a2, a3) and (b1, b2, b3), the output
shares (c1, c2, c3) are given as:
2.4. Mask refreshing
A mask refreshing algorithm consists of updating a given sharing while
encoding the same value. Refreshing algorithms are an essential ingredient
for secure masking, as they enable us to securely compose gadgets within a
larger circuit. This enables the partitioning of a masked implementation into
small components that are easier to analyze in terms of security. A
drawback of refreshing algorithms is their randomness cost, which can
account for a significant part of the global performance overhead. Three
classical refresh masks algorithms are depicted hereafter according to their
security level and efficiency.
2.4.1. Refresh masks with complexity 
The mask refreshing scheme depicted in Algorithm 2.2 has complexity
, which is quite efficient. However, it is only useful in specific
constructions such as the table recomputation countermeasure (see section
2.5). As depicted in Figure 2.1, it simply consists of updating all shares by
xoring each of them with a fresh random value, and in accumulating all of
those fresh random values into a dedicated share (here the last one cn) in
order to encode the same value (see Figure 2.1 for an illustration). This
gives a total number of operations TLinearRefreshMasks(n) = 3(n − 1).

Algorithm 2.2. LinearRefreshMasks
2.4.2. Refresh masks with complexity 
The refresh masks operation depicted in Algorithm 2.3 has complexity
, but it enables the secure composability of gadgets in a full
construction. The algorithm is a straightforward application of the ISW
multiplication scheme by performing a secure multiplication by 1, that is,
by using (1, 0, …, 0) as second input of the ISW algorithm. The security
and efficiency properties therefore directly follow from ISW. With (1, 0, …,
0) as a multiplicand, the n2 cross-products do not need to be performed,
however, we must still generate n(n − 1)/2 random values and perform n(n
− 1) additions, which gives a total number of operations
TQuadraticRefreshMasks(n) = 3n(n − 1)/2.

Figure 2.1. The LinearRefreshMasks algorithm, with the randoms ri
accumulated on the last column

Algorithm 2.3. QuadraticRefreshMasks
2.4.3. Refresh masks with complexity 
The QuasiLinearRefreshMasks algorithm depicted in Algorithm 2.4 has
complexity 
, instead of 
 for the previous algorithm,
but with the same level of security. That is, it can still ensure secure
composition in a full construction. As illustrated in Figure 2.2, the scheme
is defined recursively and for simplicity, it is assumed here that n is a power
of 2. First, a preprocessing layer LI is applied on the n input shares ai,
corresponding to lines 5–9 of Algorithm 2.4. Then the refresh masks
algorithm is applied recursively on the two halves of the shares. Eventually,
a post-processing layer LO is applied (same as LI), before outputting the
output shares di (it corresponds to lines 12–16 in Algorithm 2.4) (see Figure
2.2 for an illustration). The complexity 
 comes
from the fact that T(n) ≤ 2 · T(n/2) + c · n for some constant c, which

recursively gives T(n) ≤ 2i · T(n/2i) + i · c · n, implying
.
Algorithm 2.4. QuasiLinearRefreshMasks

Figure 2.2. Recursive definition of QuasiLinearRefreshMasks, with the
preprocessing 
layer 
LI, 
the 
two 
recursive 
applications 
of
QuasiLinearRefreshMasks on the two halves of the shares, and the post-
processing layer LO
2.5. Masking S-boxes
A block-cipher such as AES alternates several rounds, each containing some
linear transformations, and some nonlinear transformations, usually based
on S-boxes. In the following, we show how to securely mask such S-boxes
at any order.
2.5.1. The Rivain–Prouff countermeasure for AES
In order to mask the AES block-cipher, the previous ISW multiplication
gadget can be adapted to the AES finite field 
 instead of 
, by
replacing the AND operation by a finite field multiplication in 
. We
describe the corresponding SecMult algorithm in Algorithm 2.5.

Algorithm 2.5. SecMult
Moreover, the nonlinear part of the AES S-box can be written as S(x) = x254
over 
, and can be evaluated as a sequence of nonlinear multiplications
and linear squarings, with only four nonlinear multiplications. More
precisely, to compute y = x254 over 
 with four multiplications, we use
the sequence of multiplications described in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3. Sequential computation of x254
Eventually, we obtain the SecExp254 algorithm described in Algorithm 2.6.
Thanks to the additional mask refreshing, resistance against an attack of
order t is achieved with n ≥ t + 1 shares. The RefreshMasks scheme used in
Algorithm 2.6 corresponds to the QuadraticRefreshMasks or
QuasiLinearRefreshMasks algorithms described in the previous section.

Algorithm 2.6. SecExp254
2.5.2. Extension to any S-box
The Rivain–Prouff countermeasure can be extended to the high-order
computation of any S-box. Namely, any given k-bit S-box can be
represented by a polynomial 
 over 
 using Lagrange’s
interpolation theorem, and therefore, it can be securely evaluated with a
sequence of n-shared additions, squarings and multiplications.
Asymptotically, the running time of the countermeasure is dominated by the
number of nonlinear multiplications, where each nonlinear multiplication
has complexity 
 for n shares. To minimize the number of such
nonlinear multiplications, the authors described a technique called Parity-
Split, with a proven complexity of 
 nonlinear multiplications for
evaluating any k-bit S-box.
More precisely, any S-box 
 can be written using
Lagrange’s interpolation theorem as:

for coefficients 
. The naive method to high-order compute S(x)
would require 2k − 2 multiplications in 
. Since squarings are essentially
free in 
, we can do better using the following simple observation: any
polynomial Q(x) of degree t can be written as:
where both Q1(x) and Q2(x) have degree at most ⌊t/2⌋. Using this relation,
we can precompute the set of powers x2i for 1 ≤ i ≤ 2k−1 − 1, which requires
2k−1 − 2 multiplications. This set of powers is used to evaluate Q1(x2) and
Q2(x2), and the product Q2(x2) · x requires one additional multiplication,
hence a total of 2k−1 − 1 multiplications (instead of 2k − 2). By applying
recursively the above relation, we can evaluate S(x) with 
multiplications only.
2.5.3. The randomized table countermeasure
An alternative countermeasure for S-box computation is based on
randomized tables. The simplest case is first-order computation. The first-
order countermeasure consists in recomputing in RAM the original S-box S
with inputs shifted by some random r and with masked outputs. More
precisely, we compute the randomized table:
for all u ∈ {0, 1}k, where r ∈ {0, 1}k is the input mask and s ∈ {0, 1}k is
the output mask. To evaluate S(x) from the masked value x′ = x ⊕ r, it
suffices to compute y′ = T(x′), which gives y′ = T(x′) = S(x′ ⊕ r) ⊕ s = S(x)
⊕ s, and therefore y′ is a masked value for S(x).
The first-order countermeasure can be generalized as follows. Every row of
the randomized table T now consists of n shares. Given the n input shares xi

[2.2]
[2.3]
such that x = x1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ xn, we start with an n-encoding of each row of the
original S-box S, with:
for all rows u ∈ {0, 1}k, and we progressively shift the table T by the
successive input shares x1, …, xn−1. Between every shift, the n-encodings
on each row of the table are refreshed. After the last shift by xn−1, the rows
of the table have been shifted by x1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ xn−1 and therefore the table T
satisfies for all u ∈ {0, 1}k:
Then it suffices to read the table T at the row u = xn to get the n output
shares yi corresponding to y = S(x). More precisely, we let (y1, …, yn) ←
T(xn), which from [2.3] gives as required:
The high-order randomized countermeasure is described in Algorithm 2.7.
The asymptotic complexity of this countermeasure for k-bit S-boxes is
.

Algorithm 2.7. Masked computation of y = S(x)
2.5.4. Attacks
The goal of this section is to illustrate some of the pitfalls of high-order
masking. We first describe an attack against a variant of the high-order
computation of y = x254 (Algorithm 2.6) in which we use the more efficient
LinearRefreshMasks algorithm (Algorithm 2.2) for mask refreshing. We
also describe an attack against a variant of the randomized table
countermeasure in which the same masks are used for every row of the
table. These attacks demonstrate the need for provably secure constructions
of high-order masking.
2.5.4.1. Attack against x → x3 with ISW and linear mask
refreshing
In this section, we show that if in Algorithm 2.6 we use the
LinearRefreshMasks algorithm (Algorithm 2.2) instead of the
QuadraticRefreshMasks algorithm (Algorithm 2.3), then we have an attack
that requires the knowledge of fewer than d probes when using n = d + 1
shares.

Even though Algorithms 2.5 and 2.2 are both secure against d-th order
probing attack when considered separately, we show hereafter that their
sequential application, as done in Steps 2–3 and Steps 5–6 of Algorithm 2.6,
is not. Namely, we exhibit a tuple of ⌈d/2⌉ + 1 intermediate variables that
jointly depend on the sensitive input. Hence, for d > 1, this implies that the
scheme does not achieve d-th order security.
To exhibit the flaw, we assume that the attacked S-box evaluation procedure
contains the following sequence:
with (xi)i being a sharing of some sensitive variable x and with g being
some 
-linear function. Two examples of occurrence of this sequence can
be found in Algorithm 2.6: from Steps 1 to 3 (with the function g
corresponding to a squaring over 
), and from Steps 4 to 6 (with the
function g corresponding to a raising to the 4 over 
).
For the sake of clarity, we only consider the case where d is even (in the
odd case an extra intermediate variable would be needed). The flaw arises
from a particular intermediate variable of the mask refreshing combined
with d/2 intermediate variables of the multiplication. Namely, the targeted
intermediate variables are:
the variable 
 just after the fourth step during the (d/2)-th iteration of
the loop in RefreshMasks (Algorithm 2.2), denoted ℓ0 hereafter, and
which satisfies:

[2.4]
[2.5]
the product 
 arising in Step 4 of SecMult (Algorithm 2.5 called
on (xi)i and 
) for every i ∈ {1, 2, …, d/2} and j = i + d/2, denoted
ℓi hereafter, and which satisfies:
In a nutshell, the intermediate variable ℓi = (g(xi) ⊕ ri) · xd/2+i is statistically
dependent on the sum g(xi) ⊕ ri ⊕ g(xd/2+i) involved to mask z = g(x) in the
expression of ℓ0 (see equation [2.4]). Therefore, the (d/2)-tuple (ℓi)i defined
in equation [2.5] provides information on the d/2 masks g(xi) ⊕ ri ⊕
g(xd/2+i) and this information can be used to partially unmask ℓ0. In other
terms, the family of d/2 + 1 intermediate variables ℓ0, ℓ1, …, ℓd/2 depends
on the sensitive variable x.
2.5.4.2. Attack against the Schramm and Paar countermeasure
for LUTs
We start with the classical randomized table countermeasure, which is
secured against first-order attacks only. The S-box table S(u) with k-bit
input is first randomized in RAM by letting:
for all u ∈ {0, 1}k, where r ∈ {0, 1}k is the input mask and s ∈ {0, 1}k is
the output mask1. To evaluate S(x) from the masked value x′ = x ⊕ r, it
suffices to compute y′ = T(x′), as we get y′ = T(x′) = S(x′ ⊕ r) ⊕ s = S(x) ⊕
s. This shows that y′ is indeed a masked value for S(x). In other words, the
randomized table countermeasure consists of first recomputing in RAM a
temporary table with inputs shifted by r and with masked outputs, so that it

can later be evaluated on a masked value x′ = x⊕r to obtain a masked
output.
A natural generalization at any order n would be as follows: given as input x
= x1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ xn, we would start with a randomized table with inputs shifted
by x1 only and with n − 1 output masks. We would then incrementally shift
the full table by x2 and so on until xn−1, at which point the table could be
evaluated at xn. More precisely, we would initially define the randomized
table:
where s2, …, sn are the output masks, and then progressively shift the
randomized table by letting T(u) ← T(u⊕xi) for all u, iteratively from x2
until xn−1. Eventually the table would have all of its inputs shifted by x1 ⊕
⋯ ⊕ xn−1, so as previously we could evaluate y′ = T(xn) and obtain S(x)
masked by s2, …, sn.
What we have described above is essentially the Schramm and Paar
countermeasure. However, this countermeasure was later shown to be
insecure. Namely consider the table T(u) after the last shift by xn−1. At this
point, we have T(u) = S(u ⊕ x1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ xn−1) ⊕ s2 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ sn for all u. Now
assume that we can probe T(0) and T(1): we can then compute T(0) ⊕ T(1)
= S(x1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ xn−1) ⊕ S(1 ⊕ x1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ xn−1), which only depends on x1 ⊕
⋯ ⊕xn−1. Therefore, it suffices to additionally probe xn to leak information
about x = x1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ xn−1 ⊕ xn. This gives an attack of order 3 only for any
value of n and therefore, the countermeasure can only be secure against
second-order attacks.
The main issue with the previous countermeasure is that the same masks s2,
…, sn were used to mask all of the S(u) entries, so we can exclusive-or
(XOR) any two lines of the randomized table and remove all of the output
masks. A natural fix is to use different masks for every line S(u) of the table,
so we would initially write:

[2.6]
[2.7]
for all u ∈ {0, 1}k, and as previously we would have iteratively shifted the
table by x2, …, xn−1, and also the masks su,i separately for each i. The
previous attack is thwarted because the lines of S(u) are now masked with
different set of masks. Eventually we would read T(xn), which would give
S(x) masked by 
. This is the countermeasure described
in Algorithm 2.7.
2.6. Masks conversions
As depicted earlier, Boolean masking is well adapted for algorithms with
Boolean operations only, such as the AES block-cipher. However, for
algorithms that combine Boolean and arithmetic operations, it can be
advantageous to use arithmetic masking to protect the arithmetic operations,
and periodically switch between Boolean and arithmetic masking whenever
necessary. Obviously, the conversion algorithm itself must be secure against
side-channel attacks.
2.6.1. First-order Boolean to arithmetic masking
The first and undoubtedly most efficient method for converting between
Boolean and arithmetic masking secure against first-order attacks was
proposed by Goubin in 2001. Its complexity is in 
, that is,
independent of the register size k. The method is based on a surprising
property of the function 
 :
Namely, although it contains an arithmetic operation, the function Ψ is
affine in r with respect to the xor. More precisely, we have for any x, r1,
 :
Hence, given as input the two Boolean shares x1, x2 such that x = x1 ⊕ x2,
we can write using the definition of the Ψ function and from [2.7]:

where r ← {0, 1}k is a randomly generated value. We can therefore
compute the arithmetic share:
which eventually gives two arithmetic shares A and x2 of x, as required:
The complexity in 
 follows from the constant number of operations.
Indeed, as depicted in Algorithm 2.8, it requires only eight operations.
Moreover, it is easy to see that the algorithm is secure against first-order
attacks, because the left term x1 ⊕ Ψ(x1, r ⊕ x2) is independent of x2
(thanks to the mask r), and the right term Ψ(x1, r) is also independent from
x2. Eventually, the arithmetic share A is uniformly distributed when x2 is
uniformly distributed.

Algorithm 2.8. Goubin’s first order Boolean to
arithmetic conversion
2.6.2. Generalization to high order for Boolean to
arithmetic masking
A generalization of Goubin’s Boolean to arithmetic conversion algorithm to
high-order masking was proposed with a complexity 
, which is still
independent of the register size k. While it is exponential in the number of
shares n, this method is currently the most efficient one for small orders.
The scheme is designed recursively and is based on a function 
 described
in Algorithm 2.10, which takes as input n + 1 Boolean shares xi such that x
= x1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ xn+1 and outputs n arithmetic shares Di such that x = D1 + ⋯ +
Dn (mod 2k). Then, to convert from n Boolean shares instead of n + 1, it
suffices to initially let xn+1 = 0 as depicted in Algorithm 2.9.
The 
 algorithm is illustrated in Figure 2.4 and works as follows: if n = 1,
the algorithm takes as input two shares x1 and x2 and outputs D1 = x1 ⊕ x2.

[2.8]
For n ≥ 2, the following steps are performed:
1. A mask refreshing of the n + 1 shares xi’s is done, so that the following
n + 1 shares are obtained:
Note that the RefreshMasks algorithm used here corresponds to the
LinearRefreshMasks described in Algorithm 2.2, but where the
random values are accumulated on the first share instead of the last
one. Therefore, the following relations hold:
2. Thanks to the affine property of Ψ, this gives:
Therefore, by letting 
 and zi ←
Ψ(y1, yi+1) for all 2 ≤ i ≤ n, this gives:
3. Two recursive calls to the Boolean to arithmetic conversion algorithm
 are then performed:
This gives from [2.8]:

4. The number of arithmetic shares are subsequently reduced from 2n − 2
to n by some additive grouping, letting Di ← Ai + Bi for 1 ≤ i ≤ n − 2
and Dn−1 ← An−1 and Dn ← Bn−1. This gives as required the n
arithmetic shares as output: x = D1 + ⋯ + Dn (mod 2k).
Complexity: the number Tn of operations performed within 
 is
recursively defined as Tn = 2 · Tn−1 + 6 · n + 1 where T1 = 1 since 
performs a single xor. This gives the complexity Tn = 10 · 2n − 6 · n − 13.
Furthermore, the number Rn of random generations performed within 
 is
recursively defined as Rn = n + 2 · Rn−1 where R1 = 0 since no random value
is generated in 
. This gives the randomness complexity Rn = (3/2) · 2n − n
− 2.
Therefore, the complexity of Algorithm 2.9 is exponential in n, but as
previously mentioned, it performs in practice about one order of magnitude
faster than existing algorithms for small values of n.
Figure 2.4. The sequence of gadgets of high order Boolean to arithmetic
conversion algorithm 

Algorithm 2.9. High-order Boolean to arithmetic
conversion
2.6.3. High order Boolean to arithmetic and arithmetic to
Boolean masking
The main drawback of the previous algorithm is that its complexity is
exponential in the number of shares n. In the following, we describe
conversion algorithms with complexity 
 only. We start with the
problem of how to apply arithmetic operations directly on Boolean shares
and present an algorithm for secure addition modulo 2k with n shares with
complexity 
. Then, we introduce algorithms to convert from
Boolean to arithmetic masking and vice versa, again with a complexity of
 in both directions. These algorithms are proven secure in the ISW
framework for private circuits.

Algorithm 2.10. 
: Recursive high-order Boolean to
arithmetic conversion (n + 1 → n shares)
2.6.3.1. Secure addition on Boolean shares
The approach is based on the following recursion formula proposed by
Goubin, which uses the relation x + y = x ⊕ y ⊕ uk−1, and:
Algorithm 2.11 represents the solution based on Goubin’s formula to
compute the addition. We use the SecAnd algorithm (Algorithm 2.1) to
securely compute the And operations in the above recursion formula. The
time complexity of Algorithm 2.11 is dominated by the k − 1 SecAnd
performed at line 5 and is therefore 
.

2.6.3.2. Secure conversion from arithmetic to Boolean masking
We describe an algorithm for converting from arithmetic to Boolean
masking with a complexity of 
. The algorithm is best described
recursively and corresponds to Algorithm 2.12. Assume that we already
found an algorithm 
 for converting a set of n/2 arithmetic shares Ai
into n/2 Boolean shares xi such that:
Algorithm 2.11. SecAddGoubin

Algorithm 2.12. ConvertA→B
Now, given as input a variable x represented with n arithmetic shares Ai:
we first apply algorithm 
 separately on the two halves to get:
A simple expansion step is then applied, in which the n/2 shares xi and yi are
each expanded to n shares. As depicted in Algorithm 2.13, this can be done
by randomly splitting every share xi into 
 and similarly
for 
. We obtain:
Then, the n-Boolean addition circuit SecAddGoubin is applied to obtain x
represented with n Boolean shares x = z1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ zn as required. We can
check that the algorithm indeed has complexity 
, namely, the
SecAdd algorithm at line 6 has complexity 
.

Algorithm 2.13. Expand
2.6.3.3. Conversion from Boolean to arithmetic masking
We now present an algorithm for converting in the other direction, that is,
from Boolean to arithmetic masking, again with a complexity of 
.
The method is depicted in Algorithm 2.14 and is based on the use of the
previous algorithm for converting from arithmetic to Boolean masking
(Algorithm 2.12).
More precisely, given as input x = x1 ⊕ ⋯ ⊕ xn, we write:
for random elements 
. Using the previous
algorithm, we perform an arithmetic to Boolean conversion of (−A1, …,
−An−1, 0) to obtain:
This gives:

We use the SecAdd algorithm to compute:
We use the FullXor algorithm below to compute:
without leaking information on the individual shares zi. Eventually,
combining the three previous equations, we obtain as required:
The FullXor algorithm used in Algorithm 2.14 is depicted in Algorithm
2.15. It allows us to perform a randomized XOR and it is used to compute
.
Algorithm 2.14. Conversion from Boolean to
arithmetic masking

Algorithm 2.15. FullXor
2.7. Notes and further references
Section 2.3. In 2003, Ishai et al. (2003) initiated the theoretical study
of securing circuits against an adversary who can probe a fraction of
its wires. They showed how to transform any circuit of size |C| into a
circuit of size 
 secured against any adversary that can
probe at most t wires. To achieve this goal, they designed an algorithm
to securely evaluate the AND gate over 
. Rivain and Prouff (2010)
extended this method to securely compute a multiplication over 
.
Section 2.4. The LinearRefreshMasks with complexity 
 was
initially described in Rivain and Prouff (2010) while using the ISW
scheme to secure the AES S-box computation. It was later shown in
Coron et al. (2014b) that the use of such a mask-refreshing algorithm
introduced a security flaw in the overall masking scheme. The
QuadraticRefreshMasks with complexity 
 was further used in
Barthe et al. (2015) to prove the t-SNI security of a full construction.
Eventually, the QuasiLinearRefreshMasks with complexity
 was introduced in Battistello et al. (2016), where it
was proven to achieve the same t-SNI security as the
QuadraticRefreshMasks algorithm. A generalization to arbitrary n (and
not only a power of 2) is also provided in Battistello et al. (2016). Note
that a completely different mask-refreshing algorithm is described in
Andrychowicz et al. (2016), with complexity only 
, but using
nontrivial tools such as expander graphs with constant degree.
Section 2.5. The first provably secure high-order masking scheme for
the AES block-cipher was described in Rivain and Prouff (2010), by

adapting the ISW multiplication gadget to the AES finite field 
instead of 
, and evaluating the AES S-box S(x) = x254 as a sequence
of nonlinear multiplications and linear squarings. Resistance against an
attack of order t is achieved with n ≥ 2t + 1 shares, as in the original
ISW multiplication. This was later improved to n ≥ t + 1 by showing
that the ISW multiplication gadget achieves the t-SNI property Barthe
et al. (2016). This enables us to use the Rivain–Prouff countermeasure
for the full AES with n = t + 1 shares only, with some additional mask
refreshing. The Rivain–Prouff countermeasure was later extended to
any look-up table in Carlet et al. (2012). To minimize the number of
such nonlinear multiplications, the authors described a technique
called Parity-Split, with a proven complexity of 
 nonlinear
multiplications for evaluating any k-bit S-box. This was further
improved in Coron et al. (2014a), with a generic technique for fast
polynomial evaluation in 
, with heuristic complexity
. In summary, the asymptotic running time of the
Rivain–Prouff countermeasure for AES is 
, and for k-bit
generic S-boxes the running time is 
2.
A completely different high-order countermeasure for S-box
evaluation was described in Coron (2014) based on table
randomization. The countermeasure is an extension of the classical
first-order randomized table countermeasure first described in Chari et
al. (1999). An attempt to generalize this first-order countermeasure to
high-order security was proposed by Schramm and Paar (2006), but a
security flaw was shown in Coron et al. (2007). The asymptotic
complexity of the secure-randomized countermeasure from Coron
(2014) for k-bit S-boxes is 
, while the previous CGPQR
countermeasure has complexity 
 only. In Coron (2014),
a variant countermeasure for processors with large register size is
described, with the same time complexity 
 as the
CGPQR countermeasure using a similar approach as in Rivain et al.
(2008).
Section 2.6. Goubin (2001) described the first conversion algorithms
between Boolean and arithmetic masking secure against first-order

attacks. In particular, Goubin’s first-order Boolean to arithmetic
conversion seems optimal with complexity 
 independent of the
register size k. The other direction (from arithmetic to Boolean) is less
efficient with complexity 
. This was later improved by
 in Coron et al. (2015). The improvement is based on the
Kogge–Stone carry look-ahead adder, which computes the carry signal
in 
 instead of 
 for the classical ripple carry adder.
However, the 
 complexity hides a larger constant, and in
practice for k = 32 the number of operations is similar.
For security against high-order attacks (i.e. with n shares), the first
conversion algorithms were described in Coron et al. (2014a), with
complexity 
 for n shares and k-bit addition in both directions,
with a proof of security in the ISW model. As in Goubin’s first-order case,
the complexity can be improved to 
 using the same
technique as in Coron et al. (2015). However, for k = 32, this does not
improve the practical efficiency.
In Coron (2017), an efficient high-order Boolean to arithmetic conversion
algorithm was described, with complexity independent of the register size k
(as in Goubin’s first-order algorithm), following an approach initiated by
Hutter and Tunstall (2016). This technique was later improved in Bettale et
al. (2018) and corresponds to Algorithm 2.9. The conversion algorithm has
a security proof in the ISW model. In contrast, the original algorithm
described in Hutter and Tunstall (2016) had no such security proof, and
quite unsurprisingly, a third-order attack was described in Coron (2017) for
any number of shares n. Although the complexity of the new algorithm is
, in practice for small values of n, it is at least one order of
magnitude more efficient than Coron et al. (2014a, 2015).
2.8. References
Andrychowicz, M., Dziembowski, S., Faust, S. (2016). Circuit compilers
with O(1/log(n)) leakage rate. In EUROCRYPT 2016, Fischlin, M. and
Coron, J.-S. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

Barthe, G., Belaïd, S., Dupressoir, F., Fouque, P.-A., Grégoire, B. (2015).
Compositional verification of higher-order masking: Application to a
verifying masking compiler. Report 2015/506, Cryptology ePrint
Archive [Online]. Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/506.
Barthe, G., Belaïd, S., Dupressoir, F., Fouque, P.-A., Grégoire, B., Strub, P.-
Y., Zucchini, R. (2016). Strong non-interference and type-directed
higher-order masking. In ACM CCS 2016, Weippl, E.R., Katzenbeisser,
S., Kruegel, C., Myers, A.C., Halevi, S. (eds). ACM Press, New York.
Battistello, A., Coron, J.-S., Prouff, E., Zeitoun, R. (2016). Horizontal side-
channel attacks and countermeasures on the ISW masking scheme.
Report 2016/540, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/540.
Bettale, L., Coron, J.-S., Zeitoun, R. (2018). Improved high-order
conversion from Boolean to arithmetic masking. IACR TCHES, 2018(2),
22–45.
Carlet, C., Goubin, L., Prouff, E., Quisquater, M., Rivain, M. (2012).
Higher-order masking schemes for S-boxes. In FSE 2012, Canteaut, A.
(ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Chari, S., Jutla, C.S., Rao, J.R., Rohatgi, P. (1999). Towards sound
approaches to counteract power-analysis attacks. In CRYPTO’99,
Wiener, M.J. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Coron, J.-S. (2014). Higher order masking of look-up tables. In
EUROCRYPT 2014, Nguyen, P.Q. and Oswald, E. (eds). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
Coron, J.-S. (2017). High-order conversion from Boolean to arithmetic
masking. In CHES 2017, Fischer, W. and Homma, N. (eds). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
Coron, J.-S., Prouff, E., Rivain, M. (2007). Side channel cryptanalysis of a
higher order masking scheme. In CHES 2007, Paillier, P. and
Verbauwhede, I. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

Coron, J.-S., Großschädl, J., Vadnala, P.K. (2014a). Secure conversion
between Boolean and arithmetic masking of any order. In CHES 2014,
Batina, L. and Robshaw, M. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Coron, J.-S., Prouff, E., Rivain, M., Roche, T. (2014b). Higher-order side
channel security and mask refreshing. In FSE 2013, Moriai, S. (ed.).
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Coron, J.-S., Großschädl, J., Tibouchi, M., Vadnala, P.K. (2015).
Conversion from arithmetic to Boolean masking with logarithmic
complexity. In FSE 2015, Leander, G. (ed.). Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg.
Goubin, L. (2001). A sound method for switching between Boolean and
arithmetic masking. In CHES 2001, Çetin Kaya, K., Naccache, D., Paar,
C. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Hutter, M. and Tunstall, M. (2016). Constant-time higher-order Boolean-to-
arithmetic masking. Report 2016/1023, Cryptology ePrint Archive
[Online]. Available at: http://eprint.iacr.org/2016/1023.
Ishai, Y., Sahai, A., Wagner, D. (2003). Private circuits: Securing hardware
against probing attacks. In CRYPTO 2003, Boneh, D. (ed.). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
Rivain, M. and Prouff, E. (2010). Provably secure higher-order masking of
AES. In CHES 2010, Mangard, S. and Standaert, F.-X. (eds). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
Rivain, M., Dottax, E., Prouff, E. (2008). Block ciphers implementations
provably secure against second order side channel analysis. In FSE
2008, Nyberg, K. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Schramm, K. and Paar, C. (2006). Higher order masking of the AES. In CT-
RSA 2006, Pointcheval, D. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Notes
1 We can also take s = r. For simplicity, we first assume that the S-box has
both k-bit input and k-bit output.

2 Or 
 using the heuristic technique as in Coron et al.
(2014a).
OceanofPDF.com

3
Hardware Masking
Begül BILGIN1 and Lauren DE MEYER2
1Rambus Cryptography Research, Rotterdam, Netherlands
2Rambus Cryptography Research, San Francisco, USA
3.1. Introduction
In the previous chapters, various masking schemes (gadgets) have been
discussed that are provably secured in the d-probing model and may offer
composability by a refreshing of the output shares. During the security
arguments, it is assumed that the order of operations is respected and that
the internal state of the device, hence the overall leakage, depends on the
noisy leakages coming from each intermediate independently. We call a
circuit that satisfies these two assumptions an ideal circuit. Unfortunately,
these assumptions may not hold in practice.
We start this chapter with an example on hardware where the ideal circuit
assumption does not hold, which can cause an undesired leakage. We then
provide an abstraction of this behavior, which leads to an extended
adversary model. Fortunately, it is possible to create hardware
implementations that are also secured under this extended adversary model.
We present several secure gadgets and discuss the properties that bring this
security.
Note that this chapter focuses mostly on Boolean masking and that the
gadgets we provide are not exhaustive. We conclude by looking at trade-
offs between area footprint, latency and randomness cost.
3.1.1. Glitches
Remember from Chapter 2 that the order of calculation in an ISW
multiplication gadget is important. While it may be easy to preserve the
order when implementing in software, which inherently stores intermediate

variables in registers, it is not trivial to achieve this in hardware, without
incurring prohibitive area and latency costs.
Figure 3.1. Second output share of ISW with n = 2
Let us look at a naive implementation of ISW with n = 2 shares (x = x1 ⊕
x2, y = y1 ⊕ y2), which implements the AND gadget in one cycle, as
depicted for one output in Figure 3.11. In order to ensure that the circuit,
and hence the order of parenthesis, is maintained exactly, the designer needs
to use synthesis constraints. Even then, the circuit is prone to unintended
signal transitions, caused by the varying delays of logic gates and routing
imbalances. Such a hardware phenomenon (see the bottom signal in Figure
3.2) is called a glitch. An adversary in the probing model can obtain
information about the value of y = y1 ⊕ y2 by probing a single output share
of the ISW AND gate and performing multiple executions with fixed secret
y and varying data x. The glitch caused by x1 arriving late would have a
distribution that is dependent on y.
Glitches are difficult to predict, model and control. Therefore, a designer
needs to pay attention to the possible intermediate values that can leak. One
way to limit glitching is to synchronize certain intermediates by using, for
example, registers (or flip-flops at bit level). While registers do not
eliminate glitches, they can, if used carefully, limit their adverse affects. In

what follows, we denote the synchronization of a variable x with square
brackets: [x].
Figure 3.2. Example of a glitch in the signal xy.
3.1.2. Glitch-extended probes
To account for glitches without the need to model them exactly (which
would highly depend on the physical characteristics of the hardware), we
can use the following simplified adversary model (see also Figure 3.3): for
each wire g, we consider a function G that calculates g from stabilized
inputs 
. When an adversary probes g (or any intermediate of G), we will
assume that this probe reveals all inputs 
 of G up to the last
synchronization point (reg2), but no values from previous synchronization
points (reg1) or intermediates occurring during the calculations of the
functions Fi. We call the set 
 the glitch-extended probe of g.
With this set, the adversary can compute any intermediate or output of G
(both stable and transient). Therefore, if the glitch-extended probe
 does not reveal sensitive information, then neither can any
probe on G, even in the presence of glitches.

Figure 3.3. Adversarial model with glitch-extended probes
3.1.3. Non-completeness
In this chapter, we focus on masking schemes with inherent protection
against the vulnerabilities arising from glitches. Instead of trying to prevent
glitches from happening, the masking schemes we describe ensure that
when they do, they cannot reveal any sensitive information. We use an
important property, on which many masking schemes rely, to achieve this:
non-completeness.
The idea of non-completeness is that a potentially glitching function should
not depend on the complete set of shares of a sensitive value. If it does, as is
the case in ISW (see y1 and y2 in Figure 3.1), the sensitive value itself is
likely to be revealed by the glitch.
DEFINITION 3.1.–
dth-order non-completeness. Let f = (f1, f2, …) be a shared function with
component functions fi such that ⊕ fi = f. Any combination of up to d
component functions fi of f must be independent of at least one input
share of each variable.
The classical approach to share a linear function with n > d shares (see
Chapter 1) trivially satisfies the above definition. However, we need to pay
more attention to nonlinear gadgets.

3.2. Category I: td + 1 masking
It is possible to describe a dth-order non-complete sharing of a function in
various different ways. In this section, we focus on the case where the
component functions are created such that each is independent of the same
indexed share(s).
THEOREM 3.1.–
There exists a dth-order non-complete sharing of a function of degree t
with n ≥ td +1 input shares.
Proof. Let 
. Consider the monomial(s) 
 of t
variables where 
. We represent the sharing of each variable
xj as 
 where i ∈ {1, …, n}. Then,
Choose t indices from {1, …, n} and place all the terms with those
share indices for each monomial in the first component function.
Choose another t indices and place all the remaining terms with those
share indices in the second component function. Clearly, after 
iterations, all the terms for each monomial are placed in a component
function. Each component function carries information from at most t
shares of each input variable. Hence, any combination of up to d
component functions carries information from, at most, td shares of an
input. To achieve the non-completeness property, n > td, which implies
the equation n ≥ td +1 for the number of input shares.
While the above theorem and the corresponding proof describe a
methodology to generate a dth-order non-complete sharing for any function
of algebraic degree t, it does not imply that the number of output shares or
the sum of input and output shares are minimum.

[3.1]
In what follows, we first focus on security against first-order (d = 1) side-
channel analysis (SCA) of a single Boolean function, then discuss the
requirements to extend the security to a circuit which consists of multiple
such functions. Then, we move to higher-order security.
3.2.1. First-order security
Let us generate the sharing such that every component function fi is
independent of share i − 1
Clearly such a sharing satisfies the first-order non-completeness property
and is inline with Theorem 3.1 with n ≥ t + 1
THEOREM 3.2.–
If the input masking x of the shared function f is a uniform masking and
f is first-order non-complete, then a circuit implementing f is first-order
secure in the probing model, even if glitches occur in the circuit.
Proof. Since f is non-complete, each glitch extended probe of a
component function fi, as well as the corresponding output share, is
independent of at least one input share. The statistical independence of
the glitch-extended probe and the output share from the unshared
output, and hence security, follows from the uniform input sharing.
A hardware implementation of a shared circuit that has uniformly shared
input and satisfies correctness and non-completeness is called a threshold
implementation in literature.

EXAMPLE 3.1.–
A first-order non-complete sharing of xy using this approach is given as:
Given a uniformly distributed input sharing for 
, the
distribution of the output sharing 
 for the above example is given in
Table 3.1. Each table entry records the number of occurrences of a sharing
(z1, z2, z3) for z by enumerating every possible sharing (x1, x2, x3) for x and
every possible sharing (y1, y2, y3) for y.
Table 3.1. Distribution of output sharing for Example 3.1
z1, z2, z3
(x, y) 000 011 101 110 001 010 100 111
(0, 0) 7
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
(0, 1) 7
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
(1, 0) 7
3
3
3
0
0
0
0
(1, 1) 0
0
0
0
5
5
5
1
Clearly, the output sharing z is not uniformly distributed. Therefore, a trivial
composition (i.e. using z as an input to another shared function) may lead to
insecure circuits. This is inline with the discussion provided in Chapter 2 in
the context of SW masking.
Therefore, the following definition is useful.

DEFINITION 3.2.–
Uniformity. Let Sh(x) denote the set of valid sharings x. Let f be a
circuit that takes nin input shares x and produces nout output shares z.
The circuit f is uniform if and only if:
3.2.1.1. Achieving uniformity
There are different approaches to achieve uniformity. One such method
called refreshing is already described in Chapter 2. This approach is rather
generic as it is independent of the masking and the underlying function, and
is applicable here as well.
An alternative method is to increase the number of input shares nin, and if
needed, the number of output shares nout. The former increases the amount
of entropy in the system and gives flexibility on the construction.
EXAMPLE 3.2.–
The following is a correct, non-complete and a uniform sharing of xy
where 
:
Even though we have focused on a multiplication gadget (or an AND gate)
so far, it may be beneficial to consider the sharing of a bigger function

[3.2]
[3.3]
directly. For example, the following sharing of z = xy + w, where the input
sharing of w is independent of the sharings of x and y, is also uniform.
Note that the refreshing approach is a special case of the above sharing
where w = 0.
3.2.1.2. Vectorial Boolean function
The nonlinear components of many cryptographic algorithms are
represented as a vectorial Boolean function where f(x1, x2, …, xl) = (z1, z2,
… zm), where xi, 
 and:
In the rest of this section, we will assume l = m and f is invertible for
simplicity, that is, f is a permutation. In this case, it follows from the
uniformity definition that a uniform circuit f with the same number of input
and output shares is invertible if and only if f is invertible.
In the case where the algebraic degree of f if high, the sharing f becomes
increasingly more expensive. A well-known approach to implement such a
permutation is to divide it to lower degree functions first. An example of
this for the AES S-box has been provided in Chapter 2. In that case, it is
important to ensure uniform sharing of the combined input to a function for
security. In some cases, it is possible to divide the high-degree permutation
as f = g1(g2(… (gn))). Such a decomposition with low-degree gi is especially
useful. On the one hand, the lower degree gi implies lower complexity for

the gi. On the other hand, following the uniformity property, if a uniform
sharing gi exists for all gis, then first-order security can be achieved without
using additional randomness for refreshing.
3.2.2. Higher-order security
Note that for d = 1, we can have the same number of input and output
shares as in the construction in Example 3.1: nin = nout = td + 1. However,
for d > 1 and nin = td + 1, we need more output shares: nout > nin (see
Example 3.3).
EXAMPLE 3.3.–
A second-order non-complete 5-input 10-output sharing of z = xy is as
follows:
This increase in the number of output shares brings an interesting challenge
in order to avoid excessive increase as multiple functions are composed.
One option to deal with this challenge is to first register the nout shares and
then decrease the number of shares by XORing some of them
(compression). Note that while this seems trivial, we need to be careful in
order to satisfy uniformity. We will discuss such challenges in section 3.3 as
there are similarities between the two approaches. Another option is to
increase the number of input shares such that nin and nout are equal or very
close to each other. Independent of the applied method, unlike the first-
order case, uniformity and non-completeness combined is not sufficient to

construct higher-order secure implementations. The main reason for this is
the possibility of multi-variate attacks, where probes can be placed on
intermediates in different cycles.
3.3. Category II: d + 1 masking
The threshold implementations described in the previous section achieved
dth-order non-completeness by making each set of d component functions
independent of the same share(s) for all inputs (see equation [3.1]). As a
result, at least td + 1 shares were required to achieve dth-order non-
completeness. However, based on the definition of non-completeness, it is
actually sufficient to have each set of d component functions independent of
at least one share of each input, without restrictions on the share index. This
makes it possible to define a masking scheme that satisfies dth-order non-
completeness with the minimal number of shares n = d + 1.
3.3.1. General construction
An established methodology for masking the multiplication of two variables
x, 
 with dth-order security against SCA can be described in four
steps:
1. Expand n = d + 1 input shares of x and y into n2 cross products xiyj.
2. Refresh the cross products: xiyj → zij = xiyj ⊕ rij with rij chosen such
that correctness is not affected: ⊕i ⊕j rij = 0.
3. Synchronize the refreshed cross products to stop glitches from
propagating: zij → [zij] (this step is implicit in software).
4. Compress the n2 shares zij back into n = d +1 shares zi = ⊕j zij.
The first two steps are often described in matrix form, as the XOR of a
matrix of cross products and a refreshing matrix:

[3.4]
[3.5]
Variations can be made in the construction of both matrices. The most
common type of refreshing is one where only cross products of different
shares (xiyj for i ≠ j) need fresh masks (i.e. rii = 0), and where the same
mask can be used for cross products xiyj and xjyi (i.e. the refreshing matrix
is symmetric). Such a masking scheme then almost matches that of ISW
from the previous chapter.
Independent sharings
In the above scheme, it is essential that the sharings of the inputs are
independent. This is a consequence of the fact that we now only require
independence of one share of each input, without restrictions on the share
index. The following example demonstrates why this matters.
EXAMPLE 3.4.–
Consider the cross products in a first-order multiplication when y = x2
with x = (x1, x2) and 
:
Since both shares of x are combined in a single cross product, non-
completeness is clearly not satisfied.
Other types of masking
This generic masking construction is also compatible with other types of
masking, such as inner product or polynomial masking. The same four steps
can be followed, and the expanded cross product and refreshing matrices
differ only by a scaling with public coefficients.

[3.6]
3.3.2. Security argument
We can use glitch-extended probes to show why the general masking
construction of section 3.3.1 is secure in the presence of glitches. Without
loss of generality, we can assume that the refreshing matrix is symmetric.
For simplicity, let us consider a three-share multiplication (d = 2) as an
example:
Stage 1: Pre-synchronization
The first stage ends with n2 outputs zij = xiyj ⊕ rij. The glitch-extended
probe of zij is {xi, yj, rij}, so clearly, each output depends on exactly one
share of each input, as long as those input shares are independent, that is,
 and 
. As a result, any combination
of, at most, d probes can reveal, at most, d shares of each input.
Stage 2: Post-synchronization
The second stage has n2 stable inputs zij and produces n output shares
. Each output share is the sum of one row of the matrix
given in [3.6] (or [3.4]). Hence, the glitch-extended probe of zi is {zi1, zi2,
…, zin}.
In the d = 2 example, it can be verified that any combination of up to d = 2
probes does not reveal sensitive information. For example, probing z1 and
z2 reveals their combined glitch-extended probes: {z11, z12, z13, z21, z22,
z23}. Since z11 and z22 have not been refreshed, the probes obviously depend
on shares 1 and 2 of each input. It remains to be verified that they do not
depend on share 3. This is the case since both z13 and z23 have been
refreshed with a uniformly random value that is not used anywhere else in
the probe.
Stage 1 + Stage 2

A set of d probes can also consist of probes from different stages. Let us
consider the case d = 2 as an example again, with one probe in each stage.
Let zij be the probed value in the first stage. In the second stage, we then
distinguish two cases. We can probe (1) zi or zj, which directly depend on
the first probe, or (2) the other output zk with k ≠ i and k ≠ j. For example,
we will use (i, j) = (1, 2), but similar arguments can be made for other
indices.
1. The glitch-extended probe for z12 and z1 is {x1, y2, r12, z11, z12, z13}.
This probe clearly depends only on share 1 of x. With respect to y, it
clearly depends on share 2, as well as on share 1 (since z11 is not
refreshed). Again, we can claim that the probe does not depend on
share 3 of y since z13 has been refreshed with r13, which is an
independent uniform value.
2. The glitch-extended probe for z12 and z3 is {x1, y2, r12, z31, z32, z33}.
This probe clearly depends on shares 1 and 3 of x, and on shares 2 and
3 of y (since z33 is not refreshed). It clearly does not depend on share 2
of x, so it remains to be verified that it is independent of y1. Since z31
has been refreshed with independent uniform value r31, this is indeed
the case.
3.3.3. Comparing to td + 1 masking
Does the d+1-share construction satisfy the requirements of td+1-share
threshold implementation, non-completeness and uniformity? Compared to
first-order threshold implementations with t + 1 shares, where a
multiplication can be done within a single cycle, the d + 1 multiplication
consists of two stages, separated by a register. With multiple stages, the
intermediates sharings between registers are not necessarily uniform, which
means we need more than uniformity and non-completeness to achieve
security. The d + 1-share construction steps away from the strict td + 1
rules, while still adhering to the same principles.
On non-completeness
In the first stage, non-completeness is clearly satisfied, as long as the input
shares are independent. Also in the second stage, non-completeness is

satisfied, since any set of d outputs will be independent of at least one of the
input shares zij. However, this sharing is not uniform and as such, the uni-
variate notion of non-completeness is not enough to achieve probing
security, as shown in section 3.2.
We may have noted that the example in section 3.3.2 did still rely on a form
of non-completeness, since we constructed glitch-extended probes and
verified their independence of at least one share of each input. We thus
extended non-completeness to multiple stages, on the one hand, by tracing
back each stage to the input sharings of the first stage and, on the other
hand, by combining probes in multiple stages.
In fact, if we transformed the non-completeness definition to one where
each set of d glitch-extended probes (instead of components) must be
independent of at least one share of each input, and we extended it to
include probes in different stages (multi-variate), then we would have
shown that the d + 1-share construction satisfies this non-completeness. The
non-completeness used by td + 1 threshold implementations is its uni-
variate equivalent, where each set of d glitch-extended probes, taken from
within a single stage (i.e. component functions), must be independent of at
least one input share. This is why the higher-order threshold
implementations from section 3.2.2 do not achieve security against a multi-
variate adversary.
Note also that non-completeness is necessary. If any combination of d
glitch-extended probes depended on all input shares, it could reveal
sensitive information.
On uniformity
Uniformity, on the other hand, is not necessary, as exemplified by the
intermediate sharing of z with (d + 1)2 shares. In order for an n-share
sharing of x to be dth-order probing secure, we require that any set of d
shares is jointly independent of x itself. If n = d + 1, this property is
equivalent to uniformity. As such, we still require the input sharings x and y
to be uniform. However, when n > d + 1, it is possible for a non-uniform
sharing to satisfy this property. For example, the (d + 1)2-sharing of z at the
end of stage 1 is dth-order secure because any subset of d shares cannot
reveal z itself, nor x and y.

[3.7]
[3.8]
3.3.4. Higher-degree functions
We have only considered the multiplication above, which is a function of
algebraic degree t = 2. The d+1-share masking methodology also works for
functions of higher algebraic degree. In contrast with td + 1-TI, the number
of shares of the inputs and outputs can remain d + 1 regardless of the
algebraic degree t. However, the number of intermediate shares (or cross
products) increases exponentially with t. We will demonstrate it first for
simple monomials and then explain how to extend it to generic Boolean
functions.
Instead of a multiplication xy, which is a monomial of degree 2, let us
consider a monomial x1 x2 … xt of algebraic degree t > 2. The masked
monomial is similar to that of equation [3.4], but instead of two-
dimensional matrices, the cross products extend into more dimensions. If
each input has n = d + 1 shares and there are t inputs in the monomial, there
are nt cross products and thus intermediate shares. These can be refreshed,
synchronized and compressed back to n = d + 1 shares. For example, a first-
order (d = 1) sharing of a third-degree (t = 3) monomial f(x, y, z) = xyz is as
follows:
with
Note that fijk = f(xi, yj, zk).

A generic Boolean function of algebraic degree t consists of m monomials,
each with algebraic degree ≤ t. A naive way to mask the function is to mask
each monomial separately, which would mean having m(d + 1)t
intermediate shares. It is better to combine the monomials into k < m groups
such that we have only l(d + 1)t intermediate shares. Finding a minimal l
such that non-completeness is achieved is not always trivial. For any t-
degree Boolean function with up to t + 1 inputs, it is possible to achieve the
lower bound l = 1. Consider, for example, another third-degree function,
this time with four inputs: f(x, y, z, w) = xyz ⊕ yzw ⊕ xyw ⊕ xzw. We can
still use equation [3.7], but this time with fijk = f(xi, yj, zk, wi⊕j⊕k). If there
are more inputs, it is possible that we will need l > 1.
3.4. Trade-offs
The trade-off between area and latency is one that is known even from
unmasked hardware design. However, masking brings several new choices
to make in this respect. In addition, a new cost factor in the world of
masking is that of randomness. Most masking schemes require a constant
supply of fresh random bits during a calculation. In cases where the total
number random of bits per cryptographic operation becomes too high, a
pseudo-random number generator (PRNG) may be required, operating in
parallel to the algorithm and supplying “online” fresh random bits. Hence,
the more fresh randomness is needed per cycle, the higher the cost of the
implementation.
Serial and round-based architecture
As with unmasked hardware design, one way to trade area and latency is to
play with the number of parallel copies of the same block. Different
architectures for symmetric cryptography are often distinguished in the
number of S-boxes they use. Since the S-box is the only nonlinear
component, its area and latency are most impacted by masking. As a result,
serial architectures that use only one copy of the S-box for the entire state
are quite popular. They are however slow. A round-based design is much
faster, but requires enough copies of the S-box to process the entire state in
parallel, and this tends to be expensive in area. Also, the more copies of the
S-box, the higher the fresh randomness requirement. Hence, round-based

architectures are good for the latency, but come with higher area and
randomness cost.
3.4.1. Minimizing area
Decomposition
Both for td + 1 and for d + 1 masking, the number of (intermediate) shares
increases strongly with the algebraic degree t of a masked function. In
practice, in order to avoid the area cost that this entails, it is common to
decompose high-degree functions into subfunctions of degree two or
sometimes three. Since the masking of each sub-function requires at least
one register stage for synchronization, masking in hardware has a large
impact on the latency of an implementation.
Sharing hardware
The idea of a serial architecture is that the hardware of a single S-box is
used for the entire state. More extreme versions of hardware sharing exist
but are not very popular. A bit-serial design tries to further optimize the area
of the S-box by processing only one bit per cycle. The resulting benefit in
area usually does not weigh up against the enormous latency cost,
especially with today’s applications where high performance is the main
goal, whereas area constraints become less and less tight with Moore’s law.
Moreover, sharing more hardware often entails a higher security risk. The
examples of equation [3.7] showed that hardware can be shared between the
calculations of different intermediates shares, but doing so without care
could result in non-completeness breaking during a clock transition.
3.4.2. Minimizing latency
Unrolling
We talked about decomposition as a way to optimize area. When a function
already has a low degree, the opposite can be done to optimize latency. For
example, the Keccak function family has a quadratic round function. This
design ensures a relatively area-efficient implementation. However, when
we want to optimize the latency instead, we could partially unroll and
combine two iterations of the round functions into a single masked function

of higher degree. This naturally comes at the cost of an increased area
footprint.
Single-cycle masking
When registers are required in nonlinear functions (such as S-boxes), it is
practically impossible to compute a masked round function in a single
cycle. Though not literally impossible, the sacrifices in area and
randomness that would result from attempting to do so, make it quite
infeasible. Nevertheless, single-cycle masking is an important goal to
pursue if we want to minimize the overhead of masking in terms of
throughput and latency. Certain techniques such as dual-rail logic with
precharging do make it possible to achieve synchronization (or one
transition per clock cycle) without registers or flip-flops.
3.4.3. Minimizing randomness
The best case for randomness cost is when the masked function requires no
“online” randomness at all and only a small number of bits that can be
supplied as input. The “changing of the guards” trick is a popular
mechanism where these extra bits are processed by only one S-box, which
produces new such bits for the next S-box, thereby removing the need for
an “online” PRNG. So far, masking without fresh randomness in the model
of this chapter has only been achieved for first-order security. For higher
orders, advances have been made when considering a more practical
adversary with bounded query capabilities and measuring security using
techniques from linear cryptanalysis.
3.5. Notes and further references
Section 3.1. One of the first masked multiplication gadgets was
introduced by Trichina (2003). While it was introduced as a hardware
gadget, it did rely strongly on the order of operations and would turn
out not to be secure in the presence of glitches. Mangard et al. (2005a,
2005b) were the first to demonstrate that these existing schemes
(Trichina, ISW, etc.) did not provide the claimed security when
implemented in hardware, due to glitches. Reparaz et al. (2015)
introduced the adversary model that uses glitch-extended probes.

There are alternative models for dealing with glitches, such as the
transient model by Bertoni et al. (2017). The concept of non-
completeness was introduced by Nikova et al. (2006, 2009) and later
extended to higher order non-completeness by Bilgin et al. (2014).
Section 3.2. Hardware masking as described in this section is initially
introduced for first-order security as threshold implementations by
Nikova et al. (2006, 2009). The name comes from the similarities with
(n, n)-sharing in the multi-party computation context. Another
proposal for glitch-resistant masking was made by Prouff and Roche
(2011) and was also based on multi-party computation concepts. Bilgin
et al. (2014) extended threshold implementations to higher-order
security. This scheme has been shown to only provide uni-variate and
not multi-variate security by Reparaz (2015). Hardware threshold
implementations for various cryptographic algorithms, including AES
by Moradi et al. (2011), Present by Poschmann et al. (2011); Katan by
Bilgin et al. (2014) and Keccak by Bilgin et al. (2013), can be found in
literature. It has also been shown to be useful for SW implementations
by Sasdrich et al. (2018). For a detailed compendium on threshold
implementations (also known as masking with td + 1 input shares), the
reader should refer to the PhD thesis of Bilgin (2015).
Section 3.3. Reparaz et al. (2015) noted that it is possible to achieve
dth-order non-completeness with only d + 1 shares and demonstrated
the similarities of hardware masking schemes with the ISW scheme.
Simultaneously, Gross et al. (2017a) introduced domain-oriented
masking: a hardware masking scheme with d + 1 shares, which
significantly resembles the proposal of Reparaz, but has a more
efficient randomness matrix. De Cnudde et al. (2016) presented the
first application of the masking scheme with d + 1 shares to AES,
providing both first- and second-order secure implementations. For a
chronological overview of the history of hardware masking and its
application to the AES cipher, the reader can refer to Chapter 1 of the
PhD thesis of De Meyer (2020). Gross et al. (2017b) created higher
order implementations of Keccak, but Arribas et al. (2018) found a
flaw in their design, resulting from dependent input sharings, a
common pitfall. Masking types other than Boolean have not been very
common in hardware so far. However, the reader can refer to Chapter 3

of the PhD thesis of De Cnudde (2018) for detailed constructions with
inner-product and polynomial masking following the same
methodology. Ueno et al. (2017) first applied the d + 1 masking
methodology to cubic Boolean functions. A general methodology for
any algebraic degree and any security order was introduced by De
Meyer et al. (2018) and Wegener et al. (2020).
Section 3.4. The work of De Cnudde et al. (2016) presents a
comparison of first- and second-order AES implementations with both
td + 1 and d + 1 shares, which clearly shows a trade-off between area
and randomness cost. Bilgin et al. (2012), and later Kutzner et al.
(2014), created threshold implementations of all 3- and 4-bit S-boxes
by using decomposition into quadratic or cubic components. De Meyer
et al. (2018) presented a bit-serial AES for FPGA devices with a very
small area footprint, but much increased latency cost compared to
byte-serial designs. They also demonstrated how the increased degree
of hardware sharing can lead to a transient non-completeness break if
not careful. Wegener and Moradi (2018) also demonstrated how to use
the same hardware for calculating different shares. Arribas et al. (2018)
introduced the loop unrolling technique for decreasing the latency of a
masked implementation and applied it to Keccak, which has a
quadratic round function. The round function of AES, on the other
hand, has algebraic degree 7. A single-cycle masked implementation
that is secure in the presence of glitches is therefore not
straightforward to obtain. Sasdrich et al. (2020) were the first to
succeed thanks to the LUT-based masked dual-rail with precharge
logic (LMDPL) technique from Leiserson et al. (2014), which avoids
the use of registers for synchronization, and relies instead on dual-rail
logic and precharging. The “changing of the guards” trick was
introduced by Daemen (2017) and applied to Keccak. It was
generalized by Sugawara (2018) to make it applicable to AES as well.
These approaches enable first-order masking without the need for an
online PRNG. Beyne et al. (2020) introduced an interesting alternative
methodology for optimizing randomness while preserving practical
higher-order security.

3.6. References
Arribas, V., Bilgin, B., Petrides, G., Nikova, S., Rijmen, V. (2018).
Rhythmic Keccak: SCA security and low latency in HW. IACR
Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems,
2018(1), 269–290.
Bertoni, G., Martinoli, M., Molteni, M.C. (2017). A methodology for the
characterisation of leakages in combinatorial logic. J. Hardw. Syst.
Secur., 1(3), 269–281. doi: 10.1007/s41635-017-0015-0.
Beyne, T., Dhooghe, S., Zhang, Z. (2020). Cryptanalysis of masked ciphers:
A not so random idea. In Advances in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2020,
Moriai, S. and Wang, H. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Bilgin, B. (2015). Threshold implementations: As countermeasure against
higher-order differential power analysis. PhD Thesis, University of
Twente, Enschede [Online]. Available at:
http://purl.utwente.nl/publications/95796.
Bilgin, B., Nikova, S., Nikov, V., Rijmen, V., Stütz, G. (2012). Threshold
implementations of all 3 × 3 and 4 × 4 S-boxes. In Cryptographic
Hardware and Embedded Systems – CHES 2012, Prouff, E. and
Schaumont, P. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Bilgin, B., Daemen, J., Nikov, V., Nikova, S., Rijmen, V., Assche, G.V.
(2013). Efficient and first-order DPA resistant implementations of
KECCAK. In Smart Card Research and Advanced Applications - 12th
International Conference, CARDIS 2013, Francillon, A. and Rohatgi, P.
(eds). Springer, Cham. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-08302-5_13.
Bilgin, B., Gierlichs, B., Nikova, S., Nikov, V., Rijmen, V. (2014). Higher-
order threshold implementations. In Advances in Cryptology –
ASIACRYPT 2014, Sarkar, P. and Iwata, T. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Daemen, J. (2017). Changing of the guards: A simple and efficient method
for achieving uniformity in threshold sharing. In Cryptographic
Hardware and Embedded Systems – CHES 2017, Fischer, W. and
Homma, N. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.

De Cnudde, T. (2018). Cryptography secured against side-channel attacks.
PhD Thesis, KU Leuven [Online]. Available at:
https://www.esat.kuleuven.be/cosic/publications/thesis-311.pdf.
De Cnudde, T., Reparaz, O., Bilgin, B., Nikova, S., Nikov, V., Rijmen, V.
(2016). Masking AES with d+1 shares in hardware. In Cryptographic
Hardware and Embedded Systems – CHES 2016, Gierlichs, B. and
Poschmann, A.Y. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
De Meyer, L. (2020). Cryptography in the presence of physical attacks:
Design, implementation and analysis. PhD Thesis, KU Leuven [Online].
Available at: https://www.esat.kuleuven.be/cosic/publications/thesis-
384.pdf.
De Meyer, L., Moradi, A., Wegener, F. (2018). Spin me right round
rotational symmetry for FPGA-specific AES. IACR Transactions on
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, 2018(3), 596–626.
Gross, H., Mangard, S., Korak, T. (2017a). An efficient side-channel
protected AES implementation with arbitrary protection order. In Topics
in Cryptology – CT-RSA 2017 – The Cryptographers’ Track at the RSA
Conference 2017, Handschuh, H. (ed.). Springer, Cham. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-52153-4_6.
Gross, H., Schaffenrath, D., Mangard, S. (2017b). Higher-order side-
channel protected implementations of Keccak. Report 2017/395,
Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/395.
Kutzner, S., Nguyen, P.H., Poschmann, A. (2014). Enabling 3-share
threshold implementations for all 4-bit S-boxes. In ICISC 13: 16th
International Conference on Information Security and Cryptology, Lee,
H.-S. and Han, D.-G. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Leiserson, A.J., Marson, M.E., Wachs, M.A. (2014). Gate-level masking
under a path-based leakage metric. In Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems – CHES 2014, Batina, L. and Robshaw, M. (eds).
Springer, Heidelberg.

Mangard, S., Popp, T., Gammel, B.M. (2005a). Side-channel leakage of
masked CMOS gates. In Topics in Cryptology – CT-RSA 2005, Menezes,
A. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Mangard, S., Pramstaller, N., Oswald, E. (2005b). Successfully attacking
masked AES hardware implementations. In Cryptographic Hardware
and Embedded Systems – CHES 2005, Rao, J.R. and Sunar, B. (eds).
Springer, Heidelberg.
Moradi, A., Poschmann, A., Ling, S., Paar, C., Wang, H. (2011). Pushing
the limits: A very compact and a threshold implementation of AES. In
Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2011, Paterson, K.G. (ed.).
Springer, Heidelberg.
Nikova, S., Rechberger, C., Rijmen, V. (2006). Threshold implementations
against side-channel attacks and glitches. In ICICS 06: 8th International
Conference on Information and Communication Security, Ning, P., Qing,
S., Li, N. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Nikova, S., Rijmen, V., Schläffer, M. (2009). Secure hardware
implementation of non-linear functions in the presence of glitches. In
ICISC 08: 11th International Conference on Information Security and
Cryptology, Lee, P.J. and Cheon, J.H. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Poschmann, A., Moradi, A., Khoo, K., Lim, C.-W., Wang, H., Ling, S.
(2011). Side-channel resistant crypto for less than 2,300 GE. Journal of
Cryptology, 24(2), 322–345.
Prouff, E. and Roche, T. (2011). Higher-order glitches free implementation
of the AES using secure multi-party computation protocols. In
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems – CHES 2011, Preneel,
B. and Takagi, T. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Reparaz, O. (2015). A note on the security of higher-order threshold
implementations. Report 2015/001, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online].
Availale at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/001.
Reparaz, O., Bilgin, B., Nikova, S., Gierlichs, B., Verbauwhede, I. (2015).
Consolidating masking schemes. In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO
2015, Gennaro, R. and Robshaw, M.J.B. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.

Sasdrich, P., Bock, R., Moradi, A. (2018). Threshold implementation in
software – Case study of PRESENT. In COSADE 2018: 9th
International Workshop on Constructive Side-Channel Analysis and
Secure Design, Fan, J. and Gierlichs, B. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Sasdrich, P., Bilgin, B., Hutter, M., Marson, M.E. (2020). Low-latency
hardware masking with application to AES. IACR Transactions on
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, 2020(2), 300–326.
Sugawara, T. (2018). 3-share threshold implementation of AES s-box
without fresh randomness. IACR Transactions on Cryptographic
Hardware and Embedded Systems, 2019(1), 123–145.
Trichina, E. (2003). Combinational logic design for AES subbyte
transformation on masked data. Report 2003/236, Cryptology ePrint
Archive [Online]. Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2003/236.
Ueno, R., Homma, N., Aoki, T. (2017). Toward more efficient DPA-
resistant AES hardware architecture based on threshold implementation.
In COSADE 2017: 8th International Workshop on Constructive Side-
Channel Analysis and Secure Design, Guilley, S. (ed.). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Wegener, F. and Moradi, A. (2018). A first-order SCA resistant AES without
fresh randomness. In COSADE 2018: 9th International Workshop on
Constructive Side-Channel Analysis and Secure Design, Fan, J. and
Gierlichs, B. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Wegener, F., De Meyer, L., Moradi, A. (2020). Spin me right round
rotational symmetry for FPGA-specific AES: Extended version. Journal
of Cryptology, 33(3), 1114–1155.
Note
1 Note that Figure 3.1 depicts variables in 
 for simplicity, but that the
gadget and following discussions also apply to variables in 
 with
multipliers instead of AND gates. Throughout the chapter, we will use xy
for such gadgets.

OceanofPDF.com

4
Masking Security Proofs
Sonia BELAÏD
CryptoExperts, Paris, France
4.1. Introduction
The security of cryptographic implementations can be assessed following
two different methods. On the one hand, cryptographic implementations can
be confronted with concrete side-channel attacks directly on embedded
devices (as presented in previous chapters). While their security would thus
be directly evaluated on the target device by exploiting the actual leakage
that the attacker will have access to, this approach remains empirical, not
portable and does not yield measurable security levels (e.g. attacks might be
missing). On the other hand, the security of cryptographic implementations
can be formally proven based on abstract leakage models, which aim to
define the attacker’s capabilities. This second approach advantageously
makes it possible to measure concrete security levels. Although the leakage
models may be too far removed from reality to yield practical security, the
community works on improving them with respect to concrete devices in
order to connect both sides. In this chapter, we will investigate the different
leakage models and the related masking security proofs.
Several leakage models have been introduced to reason on the security of
masked cryptographic implementations against side-channel attacks. In this
chapter, we selected four of them which we believe are the most widely
used. The noisy leakage model is often considered to be the closest to the
reality of embedded devices by assuming that the adversary gets a noisy
function of each manipulated data. Given the difficulty of building security
proofs in this model, most masking schemes are proven to be secure in the
probing model, yet further from reality. Several leakage models stand in the
middle. Among them, the robust probing model supplements the probing
model by additionally considering the leakage of physical defaults and the
random probing model is closer to the noisy leakage model (with a tight
reduction), which makes it possible to build security proofs.

The next section introduces all the prerequisites that we need on circuits,
sharings, gadgets and compilers to accurately explain the security proofs in
the subsequent parts. Section 4.3 intuitively and formally introduces the
probing model. Its extension, the robust probing model, is discussed in
section 4.4. The more realistic noisy leakage and random probing models
are then defined in section 4.5. Finally, the last section is dedicated to the
composition of secure gadgets in these models.
4.2. Preliminaries
In this chapter, 
 shall denote a finite field and 
 the finite field with q
elements. Any two probability distributions D1 and D2 are said ε-close,
denoted D1 ≈ε D2, if their statistical distance is upper bounded by ε, that is
where 
 and 
 denote the probability mass functions of D1 and
D2.
4.2.1. Circuits
An arithmetic circuit over 
 is a labeled directed acyclic graph, whose
edges are wires and vertices are arithmetic gates processing operations over
. A randomized arithmetic circuit is additionally equipped with random
gates of fan-in (i.e. number of inputs) 0 and fan-out (i.e. number of outputs)
1, which output a fresh uniform random value in 
. A (randomized)
arithmetic circuit is further formally composed of input gates of fan-in 0
and fan-out 1 and output gates of fan-in 1 and fan-out 0.
During the evaluation of a ℓ-input circuit on an input 
, each wire is
assigned with a value in 
. We denote AssignWires the probabilistic
algorithm that, given a randomized arithmetic circuit C, an input 
,
and a subset 
 of wire labels outputs a set of 
 values corresponding
the assignments of the wires of C with label in 
 for an evaluation on
input x.

4.2.2. Additive sharings and gadgets
In this chapter, the n-additive decoding mapping, denoted AddDec, refers to
the function 
 defined as
for every 
 and 
. We shall further consider
that, for every 
, on input 
 the n-additive
decoding mapping acts as
For some tuple 
 and for some set I ⊆ [1; n],
the tuple (xi)i∈I is denoted 
.
DEFINITION 4.1.–
Additive Sharing: let 
. For any 
, an n-additive
sharing of x is a random vector 
 such that
. It is said to be uniform if for any set I ⊆ [1; n]
with |I| < n the tuple 
 is uniformly distributed over 
. An n-
additive encoding is a probabilistic algorithm AddEnc which on input a
tuple 
 outputs a tuple
 such that 
 is a uniform n-sharing of
xi for every i ∈ [ℓ].
We shall call an (n-share, ℓ-to-m) gadget, a randomized arithmetic circuit
that maps an input 
 to an output 
 such that
 and 
 satisfy y =
g(x) for some function g.
For an (n-share, ℓ-to-m) gadget, if we denote by I a collection of sets I = (I1,
…, Iℓ) with I1 ⊆ [1; n], …, Iℓ ⊆ [1; n] where 
 refers to the number
of shares, for some 
, we denote

 where 
 is the tuple
composed of the coordinates of the sharing 
 of indexes included in Ii.
4.2.3. Compilers
DEFINITION 4.2.–
Circuit Compiler: a circuit compiler is a triplet of algorithms (CC, Enc,
Dec) defined as follows:
CC (circuit compilation) is a deterministic algorithm that takes as
input an arithmetic circuit C and outputs a randomized arithmetic
circuit 
.
Enc (input encoding) is a probabilistic algorithm that maps an
input 
 to an encoded input 
.
Dec (output decoding) is a deterministic algorithm that maps an
encoded output 
 to a plain output 
.
These three algorithms satisfy the following properties:
Correctness: for every arithmetic circuit C of input length ℓ, and for
every 
, we have
Efficiency: for some security parameter 
, the running time of
CC(C) is poly(λ, |C|), the running time of Enc(x) is poly(λ, |x|) and the
running time of 
 is 
, where
 for some constants k1, k2.
A standard circuit compiler with sharing order n and arithmetic base
gadgets is a compiler (CC, Enc, Dec), which additionally satisfies the
following properties:

the input encoding Enc is an n-additive encoding;
the output encoding Dec is the n-additive decoding mapping AddDec;
the circuit compilation CC consists of replacing each gate in the
original circuit by an n-share gadget with corresponding functionality,
and each wire by a set of n wires carrying an n-additive sharing of the
original wire. If the input circuit is a randomized arithmetic circuit,
each of its random gates is replaced by n random gates, which duly
produce an n-additive sharing of a random value.
For standard circuit compilers, the correctness and efficiency directly hold
from the correctness and efficiency of its gadgets.
4.3. Probing model
The probing model is one of the most broadly used leakage models.
Informally, the t-probing model states that during the evaluation of a circuit
C at most t wires (chosen by the adversary) leak the value they carry. The
circuit C is thus claimed to be t-probing secure if the exact values of any set
of t intermediate variables, which are referred to as observations or probes,
do not reveal any information about its inputs. As in reality, the leakage
traces somehow reveal noisy functions of the manipulated data; this model
is motivated by the difficulty of learning information from the combination
of t variables from their noisy functions in masking schemes (as t grows).
4.3.1. Formal definition
We first recall the formal definition of the t-probing security. Intuitively, if a
simulator can perfectly simulate any set of t probes without any knowledge
of the secret inputs, then an attacker will not learn any sensitive information
from any set of t probes.

DEFINITION 4.3.–
t-Probing Security: a randomized arithmetic circuit 
 equipped with an
encoding Enc is t-probing secure if there exists a simulator Sim which,
for any input 
, for every set of wires 
 such that 
,
satisfies:
EXAMPLE 4.1.–
Let us take a toy example to illustrate this notion. Consider a
randomized arithmetic circuit 
 which implements a second-order
multiplication (as given in Algorithm 4.1 and deeply explained in
Chapter 2. Basically, from the shared input
, it computes
a shared output 
 as follows:
such that c = c0 + c1 + c2 = a · b = (a0 + a1 + a2) · (b0 + b1 + b2). From
the probing security definition, 
 is 2-probing secure if and only if any
pair of leaking wires can be perfectly simulated without the knowledge
of inputs a or b. Ignoring the copy gates to replicate variables that are to
be used more than once, Algorithm 4.1 manipulates 27 intermediate
variables; therefore, the dependency of 
 pairs of potential
leaking wires with the secrets a and b must be determined to conclude.

Algorithm 4.1. Second-order multiplication
4.3.2. Proofs for small gadgets
This section describes two widely deployed methods to prove the t-probing
security of a circuit, namely, computing the distributions and simulating the
values carried by leaking wires with input shares.
4.3.2.1. Distribution-based proofs
Determining whether the values carried by t leaking wires are jointly
independent from a secret in 
 can be done exactly by computing the
distributions. Namely, given a set 
 of t leaking wires and a 
-valued
random variable 
, we must check if the following equality is satisfied:
This can be done by computing the realizations of 
 and 
 for all the
possible inputs (including all the possible random values involved). Such a
method quickly becomes very expensive. Then, it remains to extend the
verification to all the possible wire sets 
, whose number is exponential in
t and in the total number of wires.

EXAMPLE 4.2.–
Let us take the example of the randomized arithmetic circuit
implementing the second-order multiplication of Algorithm 4.1. Taking
 as the wires carrying variable c0 as defined at Step 2 (i.e. a0 · b0 +
r0,1) and variable u as defined at Step 12 (i.e. a2 · b0), the idea is to
compute the values taken by 
 and 
 for all the possible values of the
variables involved: a, b, a0, a2, b0 and r0,1. We get (e.g. using a truth
table) that, for all 
:
and
The desired equality directly follows using the Bayes formula. The same
computation is then to be performed for the 350 remaining pairs.
4.3.3. Simulation-based proofs
A second method to circumvent the heavy computation of distributions
relies on simulation-based properties to demonstrate the independence of
the leaking wires from the input secrets. Informally, the idea is to perfectly
simulate each possible set of leaking wires with the smallest set of input
shares. If the latter is independent from the secret, then so is the set of
leaking wires. If any set of t leaking wires can be perfectly simulated with
at most t shares of each input, then the circuit is said to be t-non-interferent
(t-NI); and if the input sharing is uniform, it directly implies the t-probing
security. The formal definition is recalled hereafter.

DEFINITION 4.4.–
t-Non-Interference: a randomized arithmetic circuit 
 equipped with an
encoding Enc is t-NI if there exists a deterministic simulator Sim1 and a
probabilistic simulator Sim2, such that, for any input 
, for every
set of leaking wires 
 of size t:
Two different types of security proofs can be envisioned to demonstrate that
a circuit is t-NI, which we refer to as exhaustive proofs and generic proofs.
Exhaustive simulation-based proofs simply enumerate all the possible sets
of t leaking wires in the circuit and check (for each of them) that the
minimal number of input shares that are needed for a perfect simulation is
at most equal to t.
EXAMPLE 4.3.–
The set 
 of two leaking wires carrying the variables a0 · b0 + r0,1 and
a2 · b0 of our second-order multiplication circuit can be perfectly
simulated from the set of input shares (a2, b0). Indeed, the second
variable is perfectly simulated from the two input shares and the first
variable can be generated uniformly as random as its distribution is
independent from any input share with the addition of the random value
r0,1, which is used nowhere else in 
.
Such exhaustive simulation-based proofs are implemented in automatic
verification tools that take the description of a randomized arithmetic circuit
as input and produce either a security proof in the probing model or output
a potential attack path. Some of these tools determine the smallest set of
input shares required for the simulation from various methods that are more

or less efficient and complete. See Chapter 5 for further details on these
tools.
Generic NI-based proofs aim to demonstrate the t-non-interference of a
circuit masked with n shares (e.g. n = t + 1 shares), without instantiating n
and t. The main idea is to prove that whatever the set of t < n leaking wires,
they can be simulated with at most t shares of each input.
EXAMPLE 4.4.–
Consider a very simple sharewise addition gadget masked with n shares
such that for any input sharings 
 and 
, the output
sharing  is defined as follows:
Now, let 
 be a set of probes such that 
. In our example,
probes can take the form of a share of , a share of , or a share of . We
need to demonstrate that these probes can be perfectly simulated using at
most t shares of  and t shares of . To do so, we define two sets I and J
that are initially empty and which will represent the indices of the needed
shares of  and , respectively. Namely, for each probe p in 
, we suggest
to fill them as follows:
we add the index i to I if p corresponds to ai;
we add the index i to J if p corresponds to bi;
we add the index i to I and the index i to J if p corresponds to ci.
Doing so, we have covered all the possible probes and we can note that |I|
and |J| are both upper bounded by 
 (since each probe adds at most one
index to each set). Now, it remains to show that the shares of  whose
indices are in I and the shares of  whose indices are in J are enough to
perfectly simulate all the probes in 
:

for any probe p such that p = ai, i is in I and so p can be perfectly
simulated from ai;
for any probe p such that p = bi, i is in J and so p can be perfectly
simulated from bi;
for any probe p such that p = ci, i is in I ∩ J and so p can be perfectly
simulated from ai and bi.
We have thus demonstrated that any set 
 of at most t probes (with t < n)
can be perfectly simulated from at most 
 shares of each input, hence the
considered gadget is t-NI.
While this example remains very simple, a very detailed example of such a
proof of t non-interference for a more complex gadget is provided in
Appendix C of Barthe et al.’s (2016) paper from CCS.
4.3.4. Limitations
The probing model is quite convenient for security proofs as it manipulates
the exact values carried by the leaking wires. Nevertheless, it fails in
precisely reflecting the reality of embedded devices in at least two main
aspects.
On the one hand, it does not natively consider physical defaults, like
glitches or couplings which can yield leakage on secret values with less
observations than expected from the probing security order (see Chapter 3
for more details).

EXAMPLE 4.5.–
In order to illustrate the limitations of the probing model with respect to
some physical effects, we take a simple example. On many micro-
controllers, we observe that the power consumption could strongly
depend on the number of bits that are actually modified when adding a
new variable in a register. In the example of Algorithm 4.1, if output
variables correspond to registers, then we can see that a0 · b2 (line 11)
and a1 · b2 (line 17) are successively stored in the same register. These
successive operations are likely to leak at once the Hamming distance
(i.e. the number of ones in the binary expression of the exclusive or)
between a0 · b2 and a1 · b2. A single observation might reveal
information on two shares of input a, and the corresponding gadget
made of n-share variables would not be (n − 1)-NI.
On the other hand, the probing model fails to capture the powerful
horizontal attacks, that is, it typically ignores the repeated manipulation of
identical sensitive intermediate variables which would average the noise
and hence remove uncertainty on secret variables. In practice, if we
reasonably assume that each variable concretely leaks a deterministic
function of its value plus an independent Gaussian noise with a constant
standard deviation, then observing α occurrences of this variable will yield
a reduction of the noise by a factor 
. In the probing model, such
repetitions have no effect on the targeted security order.
4.4. Robust probing model
In the t-probing model, t circuit wires are supposed to leak, independently
from each other. However, in practice, physical defaults might generate a
leakage of values carried by several wires at once. In that case, the lowest
secret-dependent statistical moment of the leakage distribution could be
lower than t. The most typical examples of physical defaults include
transitions and glitches, and probes can be extended accordingly. For
instance, in the presence of glitches, probes (or equivalently observations)
might reveal all the variables carried by coming wires up to the last

synchronization point. Such probes thus include not only one, but a set of
wires (see Chapter 3 for further details). Similarly, pairs of values that are
successively stored in the same memory cell may leak at once (when the
second variable replaces the first one); therefore, in the presence of
transition-based leakage, probes are generally assumed to include specific
pairs of wires.
Informally, a circuit is t-robust probing secure if any set of t so-called
extended probes is independent from its inputs. The main idea remains
similar to that of the probing model with the difficulty of combining several
noisy values but the model is now refined by extending the probes that are
likely to reveal more information than one single variable at once,
following the practical observations on embedded devices.
4.4.1. Formal definition
The formal definition of the t-robust probing model directly follows that of
the probing model in which wires are replaced by extended probes. The
latter may be reduced to sets of wires which simultaneously leak the values
they carry. The definition of these sets completely depends on the physical
defaults that are captured and on the architecture of the circuit.
DEFINITION 4.5.–
t-Robust Probing Security: a randomized arithmetic circuit 
 equipped
with an encoding Enc is t-robust probing secure if there exists a
simulator Sim which, for any input 
, for every set of extended
probes 
 such that 
 and pointing to the set of wires 
,
satisfies:
In this definition, a single extended probe in 
 potentially represents
several wires in 
. That is why 
 but 
 can be larger in size than
t.

EXAMPLE 4.6.–
Let us consider a randomized arithmetic circuit implementing
Algorithm 4.1 such that the three first steps are executed before the
variable c0 is stored in a register. In the presence of glitches, an
extended probe on c0 after these three steps (i.e. 
) could
leak all the variables of coming wires up to the last synchronization
point at once, namely, a0, b0, r0,1 and r0,2 (i.e.
). Four wires could thus be targeted at the
cost of a single probe.
Similarly, in case variable u at Step 5 and variable u at Step 12 are stored in
the same memory cell consecutively, then a single probe at Step 12 might
reveal information on the two variables a1 · b0 and a2 · b0 (corresponding to
two different wires). In this case, two shares of a would be partly revealed
at the cost of a single observation, which would reduce the robust security
order to at most 1.
4.4.2. Proofs for small gadgets
As in the probing model, the security of small gadgets in the robust probing
model can be demonstrated through distribution-based proofs or
(exhaustive or generic) simulation-based proofs. The former behave the
same as in the probing model but the leaking wire set 
 can be of size
larger than t with extended probes. Exhaustive simulation-based proofs
enumerate all the possible sets of leaking wires corresponding to t extended
probes (i.e. sets of leaking wires which are at least of size t) in the circuit
and check for each of them that the minimal number of input shares that are
needed for a perfect simulation is at most equal to t. Proving that a larger set
only depends on t input shares may be more complex but the number of
possible sets is very likely to be reduced.

EXAMPLE 4.7.–
Let us get back to the example of the second-order multiplication. We
rewrite it in Algorithm 4.2 with a careful usage of registers. Namely, the
notation "[v]" means that at this step, the output variable of the
expression v is stored in a register. We then assume that each
intermediate variable leaks all its inputs from their last storage in
registers. For instance, the output c1 (at Step 10) would leak a1, b1, r1,2
and v = ((r0,1 + a0 · b1) + a1 · b0), making it useless for an attacker to
target these variables individually. The leaking sets are then larger but
their number is much smaller: 
 compared to 
 in
the probing model.
Algorithm 4.2. Second-order multiplication with
careful storage in registers
Eventually, generic simulation-based proofs are also a bit different. Unlike
in the probing model, where t input shares can be used to simulate t leaking
wires, we now need t input shares to potentially simulate significantly more.

EXAMPLE 4.8.–
Getting back to our example of the n-share sharewise addition gadget,
each probe p on an output share ci (for 1 ≤ i ≤ n) would leak information
on ci = ai + bi, ai and bi (instead of only ci). However, the gadget
remains t-NI (for t < n) in the robust probing model since each
(extended) probe can still be simulated using at most one share of each
input. In our example, when p = ci (for some 1 ≤ i ≤ n), all the
corresponding leaking wires ci = ai + bi, ai and bi can be simulated from
one share of  (i.e. ai) and one share of  (i.e. bi).
4.4.3. Limitations
While the robust probing model nicely supplements the probing model by
handling physical defaults, it suffers from the same limitations regarding
horizontal attacks. Indeed, the robust probing model is similarly based on a
fixed number of probes, regardless of their number of occurrences (i.e.
usages).
4.5. Random probing model and noisy
leakage model
The noisy leakage model can be seen as a specialization of the only
computation leaks model. Informally, a circuit is secure in the noisy leakage
model if the adversary cannot recover non-negligible information on the
secrets from a noisy function of each intermediate variable of the
implementation. Such a noisy function f is said to be δ-noisy if it satisfies
, where Δ denotes the
statistical distance between the laws of 
 and 
 over the random
distribution of 
 and for a uniform random variable 
. We stress that
any power or electromagnetic leakage can be captured by this model.

4.5.1. Formal definition of the noisy leakage model
In the noisy leakage model, each wire is assumed to leak a noisy function of
the value it carries. Let δ be the corresponding noise parameter. The formal
definition follows. Informally, a circuit is secure against noisy leakage if the
noisy leakage of each of its wires is not enough to recover non-negligible
information on the input secrets.
DEFINITION 4.6.–
Security against δ-Noisy Leakage: let 
 be a uniform random variable
over 
. A randomized arithmetic circuit C with 
 input
gates and made of a set 
 of wires is ε-secure against δ-noisy leakage
with respect to encoding Enc if:
where
for any δ-noisy functions 
.
Note that the statistical distance can be based on the L2 (Euclideans) norm,
on the L1 norm, or even on the relative error.
4.5.2. Limitations
The security proofs remain far from convenient and masking schemes
continue to be verified in the probing model.
4.5.3. Reduction to the probing model
The noisy leakage security can be reduced to the probing security. This
reduction relies on an intermediate leakage model, called random probing
model. Informally in the random probing model, each intermediate variable
leaks with some constant leakage probability p. A circuit is secure if there is

a negligible probability that these leaking wires actually reveal information
about the secrets. The random probing model further encompasses the
powerful horizontal attacks that exploit the repeated manipulations of
variables in an implementation and also benefits from a tight reduction with
the noisy leakage model, which becomes independent of the size of the
circuit.
The reduction of the noisy leakage security to the probing security first
relies on the fact that, by applying the Chernoff bound, a t-probing secure
computation is also p-random probing secure with p = t/s, where s denotes
the number of gates in the original circuit. The reduction is not tight in this
respect (considering a constant number of probes) since the security level
decreases as the size of the circuit increases. The second transition and key
lemma of the reduction proves that p-random probing security implies δ-
noisy leakage security with 
, where 
 denotes the cardinal
of the base field 
. This is because any δ-noisy function f can be written as
f(·) = g ○ ϕ(·), where g is a randomized function and ϕ is a p-random
probing function (i.e. ϕ(x) = x with probability p and ϕ(x) = ⊥ otherwise)
with 
.
REMARK 4.1.–
Note that the definition of the noisy leakage model can be modified
using other metrics than the statistical distance in order to tighten the
reduction. For instance, using the average relative error (ARE) from
pointwise mutual information would eliminate the multiplicative factor
. This is because the statistical distance is an average case metric,
while the random probing is a worst-case measurement of the leakage.
4.5.4. Formal definition of the random probing model
Let p ∈ [0, 1] be some constant leakage probability parameter. This
parameter is sometimes called leakage rate in the literature. Informally, the
p-random probing model states that, during the evaluation of a circuit C,
each wire leaks its value with probability p (and leaks nothing otherwise),
where all the wire leakage events are mutually independent.

In order to formally define the random-probing leakage of a circuit, we
shall define an additional leaking-wires sampler. This probabilistic
algorithm takes as input a randomized arithmetic circuit C and a probability
p ∈ [0, 1], and outputs a set 
, denoted as:
where 
 is constructed by including each wire label from the circuit C
with probability p to 
 (where all the probabilities are mutually
independent).
DEFINITION 4.7.–
(p, ϵ)-Random Probing Security: a randomized arithmetic circuit C with
 input gates is (p, ϵ)-random probing secure with respect to
encoding Enc if there exists a simulator Sim such that for every
:
We can further consider a simulation with abort. In this approach, the
simulator first calls the leaking-wires sampler to get a set 
 and then
either aborts (or fails) with probability ε or outputs the exact distribution of
the wire assignment corresponding to 
. Formally, for any leakage
probability p ∈ [0, 1], the simulator Sim is defined as:
where SimAW, the wire assignment simulator, either returns ⊥ (simulation
failure, with probability ε) or a perfect simulation of the requested wires. It
is not hard to see that if we can construct such a simulator SimAW for a
compiled circuit 
, then this circuit is (p, ε)-random probing secure.
4.5.5. Proofs in the random probing model
In this section, we show how to compute the simulation failure probability ε
as a function f(p) of the leakage probability p.

[4.1]
We consider a compiled circuit 
 composed of s wires labeled from 1 to s.
The simulation failure probability ε can then be explicitly expressed as a
function of p. Namely, we have ε = f(p) with f defined for every p ∈ [0, 1]
by:
with ci the number of subsets 
 of cardinality i for which the
simulation fails. For any circuit 
 achieving t-probing security, the values
ci with i ≤ t are equal to zero, which implies the following simplification:
EXAMPLE 4.9.–
Evaluating f(p) for the second-order multiplication gadget: getting back
to our second-order multiplication gadget from Algorithm 4.1, we can
compute the failure function (using automatic tools; see Chapter 5) and
display its first coefficients:
Note that the three first coefficients are zero, which confirms the second-
order probing security of this gadget. Then, 1, 297 triplets of intermediate
variables are leaking information on the secret inputs (on 2, 925 triplets in
total). Given the level of noise of a chosen underlying platform, the
probability p can be defined to evaluate the random probing security
parameter ε = f(p) of this gadget.

4.5.6. Extension to handle physical defaults
In a first attempt, the random probing model assumes that all the wires in a
circuit are leaking independently with the same probability p. In practice, in
presence of physical defaults, this assumption may be too strong. First,
different wires may leak with different probabilities (i.e. different signal-to-
noise ratios). Second, dependencies might occur between the leakage of
different wires.
In the first scenario, more accurate probabilities can be computed from the
signal-to-noise ratios. From independent probabilities for each wire, it is
easy (but much less efficient) to compute the failure function f. Unlike the
formula from equation [4.1], sets of wires cannot be jointly evaluated based
on their size as they would not share the same probability to leak anymore.
The probability that a tuple (x1, x2, …, xα) of at least α wires jointly leaks is
then:
The probability that a tuple (x1, x2, …, xα) of only a wires among β > α
wires leaks is then:
If all the probabilities are different, then all the tuples must be individually
considered in the computation of the failure function.
The presence of physical defaults like glitches breaks the independence
between the leaking probabilities of different variables. In particular, wires
that carry variables in the same computation between two synchronization
points are likely to leak simultaneously. The computation of the failure
function then depends on the dependencies between the leaking wires.
4.6. Composition
As explained in the previous sections, exhaustive or generic proofs can be
built to demonstrate the security of small gadgets implementing atomic
operations (e.g. additions and multiplications). One step further, building
security proofs for complex circuits was shown to be either error prone for

hand-made proofs or computationally impossible with automatic
verification tools. Hence, the need to split big circuits into smaller blocks
that can be proven secure and then safely combine them with well-defined
composition rules (see Figure 4.1 for an illustration).
In the following, we will recall the main composition rules for the
aforementioned models and explain how to use them to safely compose
small secure gadgets.
Figure 4.1. Illustration of (de)composition
4.6.1. Composition in the probing model
The two main composition techniques to achieve global probing security
are described hereafter.
4.6.1.1. Doubling the Number of Shares
A simple method to build secure masked schemes for Boolean circuits is
based on the use of two specific gadgets and the doubling of the number of
shares. Concretely, any Boolean circuit can be decomposed into and and not
gates only:
Each and gate can be replaced by the (n = 2t + 1)-share ISW
multiplication gadget recalled in Chapter 2.
Each not gate can be replaced by a (n = 2t + 1)-share gadget applying a
not gate to one single share only.
Then, it can be easily shown that any wire among these gadgets in a
Boolean circuit can be perfectly simulated from at most the same two
shares i and j at input/output of all the circuit’s gadgets. Therefore, any set
of t probes can trivially be simulated from at most 2 · t shares of all the
manipulated data in the circuit and the whole Boolean circuit is thus t-
probing secure.

Although this method can be used to safely mask any Boolean circuit in the
probing model, the doubling of the number of shares makes it quite
expensive.
4.6.1.2. Non-interference-based proofs
Relying on simulation-based properties, it is possible to achieve a tighter
composition with gadgets with the optimal number of n = t + 1 shares, at
the cost of stronger security properties. Indeed, directly composing any
gadget of n = t + 1 shares does not always yield t-probing security, due to
the dependency between some gadgets’ inputs.
EXAMPLE 4.10.–
See, for instance, the masking scheme that takes a (n = t + 1)-sharing a
and that computes g2(a, g1(a)) using two t-NI gadgets g1 and g2 (see
Definition 4.4), illustrated in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2. Composition of two t-NI gadgets.
A t-probing adversary can observe t0 input shares of a, t1 intermediate
variables on g1 and t2 intermediate variables on g2 as soon as t0 + t1 + t2 ≤ t.
From the t-NI property of g2, all its t2 probes can be perfectly simulated
from t2 shares of a and t2 output shares of g1. The t1 probes of g1 together
with the t2 output shares required to simulate g2’s probes can themselves be
perfectly simulated from t1 + t2 input shares of g1, that is, shares of a. At the

end, all the probes can be simulated from t0 + t1 + 2 · t2 shares of a, which
can be higher than t. The proof therefore cannot be completed; hence the
need for stronger properties1.
An example of a stronger property is the strong non-interference. This
benefits from stopping the propagation of the probes between the output
and the input shares and additionally trivially implies t-NI. Intuitively, a
circuit is t-strong non-interferent (t-SNI) if and only if any set of at most t
intermediate variables whose tint on internal variables and tout on the output
shares can be perfectly simulated with at most tint shares of each input.
DEFINITION 4.8.–
t-Strong Non-Interference: a randomized arithmetic circuit 
 equipped
with an encoding Enc is t-SNI if there exists a deterministic simulator
Sim1 and a probabilistic simulator Sim2, such that, for any input
, for every set of internal leaking wires 
 of size ti and
output leaking wires 
 of size to such that ti + to ≤ t:
EXAMPLE 4.11.–
Getting back to our example, let us assume now that g1 is t-SNI, as
illustrated in Figure 4.3. A t-probing adversary can still observe t0 input
shares of a, t1 intermediate variables on g1 and t2 intermediate variables
on g2 (which is t-NI) as soon as t0 + t1 + t2 ≤ t.

Figure 4.3. Composition of a t-SNI gadget and a t-NI gadget.
From the t-NI property of g2, all its t2 probes can be perfectly simulated
from t2 shares of a and t2 output shares of g1. Then, the t1 probes of g1
together with the t2 output shares required to simulate g2’s probes can
themselves be perfectly simulated from only t1 input shares of g1, thanks to
the t-SNI property (and because t1 + t2 ≤ t). At the end, all the probes of the
circuit can be simulated from t0 + t1 + t2 shares of a which is always lower
or equal to t, which is enough to conclude that the circuit is t-NI, hence t-
probing secure.
REMARK 4.2.–
Many other properties based on the non-interference notions can be
used to build tighter compositions with lower complexity and/or better
security levels; in particular, the probe isolating non-interference (PINI)
property reasons on the dependency between a probe and the index of
the share of input it can be simulated from, rather than the number of
probes and input shares.
In case a circuit misses gadgets with strong properties to achieve
composition, a common practice is to add so-called refresh gadgets. The
latter are functionally equivalent to the identity function but refresh the
sharing with new random values to break the dependencies between the old
input sharing and the new one. Note that inserting t-SNI refresh gadgets at

careful locations is enough to make a randomized arithmetic circuit made of
t-NI secure gadgets globally t-probing secure.
4.6.1.3. Extension in the glitch robust probing model
Intuitively, the simulation strategy used in the probing model to securely
compose probing gadgets can directly be applied to the glitch robust
probing model when there are no glitches on the inputs. Also, it is actually
proven to be true in the latter scenario. Namely, we can build a global
simulator from glitch-robust probing simulators on each individual gadget
which take and produce extended probes.
4.6.2. Composition in the random probing model
Probing-secure schemes are also secure in the random probing model, but
the tolerated leakage probability might not be constant, which is not
satisfactory from a practical viewpoint. Indeed, in practice, the side-channel
noise may not be customizable by the implementer.
In this section, we describe two methods to safely compose gadgets and
build schemes that are secure in the random probing model.
4.6.2.1. Simulation based on the number of shares
The first method relies on the random probing composability notion for a
gadget. Informally and similarly to the non-interference property in the
probing model, this notion relies on the capability for a gadget to tolerate a
certain number of probes on its output and a certain number of probes on its
intermediate variables. All these probes must additionally be (almost
perfectly) simulated by a fixed set of input shares to ensure the composition
with prior gadgets.

[4.2]
DEFINITION 4.9.–
Random Probing Composability: let 
. An (n-share, ℓ-to-
m) gadget 
 is (t, p, ε)-random probing
composable (RPC) for some 
 and p, ε ∈ [0, 1] if there exists a
deterministic algorithm 
 and a probabilistic algorithm 
such that for every input 
 and for every set collection J1 ⊆
[1; n], …, Jm ⊆ [1; n] of cardinals |J1| ≤ t, …, |Jm| ≤ t, the random
experiment:
yields
and
where J = (J1, …, Jm) and 
. Let 
. The gadget
G is (t, f)-RPC if it is (t, p, f(p))-RPC for every p ∈ [0, 1].
In the above definition, the first-pass simulator 
 determines the
necessary input shares (through the returned collection of sets I) for the
second-pass simulator 
 to produce a perfect simulation of the leaking
wires defined by the set 
, together with the output shares defined by the
collection of sets J. Note that there always exists such a collection of sets I
since I = ([1; n],…, [1; n]) trivially allows a perfect simulation, whatever
 and J. However, the goal of 
 is to return a collection of sets I

with cardinals at most t. The idea behind this constraint is to keep the
following composition invariant: for each gadget, we can achieve a perfect
simulation of the leaking wires plus t shares of each output sharing from t
shares of each input sharing. We shall call failure event the event that at
least one of the sets I1, …, Iℓ output of 
 has cardinality greater than t.
When (t, p, ε)-RPC is achieved, the failure event probability is upper
bounded by ε according to equation [4.2]. A failure event occurs whenever
 requires more than t shares of one input sharing to be able to
produce a perfect simulation of the leaking wires (i.e. the wires with label in
), together with the output shares in 
. Whenever such a failure
occurs, the composition invariant is broken. In the absence of a failure
event, the RPC notion implies that a perfect simulation can be achieved for
the full circuit composed of RPC gadgets. This is formally stated in the next
theorem.
THEOREM 4.1.–
Composition: let 
, p, ε ∈ [0, 1], and CC be a standard circuit
compiler with (t, p, ε)-RPC base gadgets. For every (randomized)
arithmetic circuit C composed of |C| gadgets, the compiled circuit
CC(C) is (p, |C| · ε)-random probing secure.
4.6.2.2. Simulation based on the set of shares
The first method relies on the number of leaking wires at the input and
output of each composable gadget. By preserving the same number of
leaking wires at the input and output, the security of each gadget can be
easily considered separately and the composition can be efficiently
evaluated. Nevertheless, the security of the composition can be tighter by
further considering specific sets of leaking inputs and outputs rather than
their number.
This second method therefore relies on so-called (two-entry) probe
distribution tables (PDT). Informally, for some gadget , its PDT provides,
for a set of input shares I and a set of output shares O, the probability that a
simulator exactly needs I to simulate the leaking wires in  (i.e. from

LeakingWires(G,p)) and the output shares O. Contrary to the first method,
which records the number of required input and output shares, the PDT
records the exact input and output sets of shares.
DEFINITION 4.10.–
Probe Distribution Table: let p ∈ [0, 1] be some constant leakage
probability parameter. Let G be an (n-share, ℓ-to-m) gadget with a set of
input wires I = (I1, …, Iℓ) and a set of output wires O = (O1, …, Om).
The PDT of G is a 
 matrix such that PDTG [I′, O′] is
the probability for I′ to be the smaller set that is enough to simulate the
leaking wires from LeakingWires(G,p) together with O′.
EXAMPLE 4.12.–
Let us take the very simple example of a (1-share, 2-to-1) gadget as an
xor gate, as represented in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4. xor gate with a single share for each input
If we assume that each internal wire leaks with probability p, then its PDT
table is given by:
O′= ∅
O′ = {c1}
I′ = ∅
1 − p2
0
I′ = {{a1}}
p · (1 − p) 0

I′ = {{b1}}
p · (1 − p) 0
I′ = {{a1}, {b1}} p2
1
For instance, the probability for I′ = {{a1}} to be the smallest set that is
enough to simulate the leaking wires from LeakingWires(G, p) is computed
from the probability that exactly a1 is leaking (and not b1, otherwise we
would need b1 as well), which is p · (1 − p). Furthermore, if O′ is not empty,
that is, O′ = {c1}, then we need both input shares to simulate it, that is, I′ =
{{a1}, {b1}}, hence the second column.
Note that 
 is similar to the
failure function from equation [4.1] but where ci denotes the number of
leaking sets of size i that exactly requires the input shares I′ to be simulated
together with O′.
One step further, there is a direct relation between the probe distribution
table and the random probing security: a gadget G with a single input
(whose sharing is indexed by I) and a PDT PDTG is (p, PDTG[I, ∅])-
random probing secure. The relation can be extended to multiple-input
gadgets by considering the sum 
 for all I′ that cover at least
one input. A partial order can be defined on PDT so that for two gadgets G1
and G2:
means that the amount of information leaked in G1 is less than or equal to
the information leaked in G2. Using this partial order, composition of
gadgets can be built directly from their PDTs. We recall two main
composition theorems to handle the two scenarios of parallel composition
and sequential composition (see Figure 4.5).

Figure 4.5. Parallel (left) and sequential (right) composition of two gadgets
THEOREM 4.2.–
Parallel Composition: let G1 and G2 be two gadgets and let 
 and
 be their respective probe distribution tables. The probe
distribution table PDTG of gadget G = G1||G2 can be computed as
follows:
where ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product between matrices.
THEOREM 4.3.–
Sequential Composition: let G1 be an (ℓ1-to-m) gadget and let G2 be an
(m-to-ℓ2) gadget. Let 
 and 
 be their respective probe
distribution tables. The probe distribution table PDTG of gadget G = G2
○ G1 is bounded as follows:
where · denotes the standard matrix multiplication.
The global composition theorem is stated below.

THEOREM 4.4.–
Composition: let p, ε ∈ [0, 1]. Let C be a (n-share, ℓ-input) randomized
arithmetic circuit of input sharings indexed by I made of gadgets G1,
…, Gm. Then, the PDT of C is upper bounded by a composition f of the
PDTs of G1, …, Gm, which directly depends on the circuit’s structure:
C is then 
-random probing secure for all the sets
I’ that cover at least one input of C. While this method yields tighter
security parameters, it is also more expensive to evaluate. Hybrid
methods can be exhibited with different trade-offs in terms of
complexity and security evaluation.
4.7. Conclusion
This chapter has introduced several leakage models that are commonly used
to model the attacker’s observations on masking schemes during a side-
channel attack. Different methods have been discussed depending on these
leakage models to prove the security of the underlying masking schemes.
Some of these apply directly to individual gadgets and can then be extended
with composition techniques to prove the security of larger circuits.
The next chapter will present verification techniques to automatically prove
the security of individual gadgets in the different leakage models, following
the security notions introduced in this chapter.
4.8. Notes and further references
The second-order multiplication example was introduced by Ishai et al.
(2003).
Section 4.3. The probing model was introduced by Ishai et al. (2003).

Section 4.5. The noisy leakage model was inspired from Chari et al.
(1999) and formalized by Rivain and Prouff (2010) and then by Prest
et al. (2019). The random probing model was first used in Ishai et al.
(2003); Ajtai (2011), and then formalized in Duc et al. (2014).
Section 4.6. Puzzles are largely inspired from figures in Rossi (2020).
Doubling the number of shares was suggested by Ishai et al. (2003). NI
and SNI were introduced in Barthe et al. (2016) and PINI was
introduced in Cassiers and Standaert (2020). Random probing
composability was defined in Belaïd et al. (2020) and further refined in
Belaïd et al. (2021a).
4.9. References
Ajtai, M. (2011). Secure computation with information leaking to an
adversary. In 43rd ACM STOC, Fortnow, L. and Vadhan, S.P. (eds).
ACM Press, New York.
Barthe, G., Belaïd, S., Dupressoir, F., Fouque, P.-A., Grégoire, B., Strub, P.-
Y., Zucchini, R. (2016). Strong non-interference and type-directed
higher-order masking. In ACM CCS 2016, Weippl, E.R., Katzenbeisser,
S., Kruegel, C., Myers, A.C., Halevi, S. (eds). ACM Press, New York.
Belaïd, S., Coron, J.-S., Prouff, E., Rivain, M., Taleb, A.R. (2020). Random
probing security: Verification, composition, expansion and new
constructions. In CRYPTO 2020, Micciancio, D. and Ristenpart, T. (eds).
Springer, Heidelberg.
Belaïd, S., Rivain, M., Taleb, A.R. (2021a). On the power of expansion:
More efficient constructions in the random probing model. In
EUROCRYPT 2021, Canteaut, A. and Standaert, F.-X. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Belaïd, S., Rivain, M., Taleb, A.R., Vergnaud, D. (2021b). Dynamic random
probing expansion with quasi linear asymptotic complexity. In
ASIACRYPT 2021, Tibouchi, M. and Wang, H. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.

Cassiers, G. and Standaert, F. (2020). Trivially and efficiently composing
masked gadgets with probe isolating non-interference. IEEE Trans. Inf.
Forensics Secur., 15, 2542–2555. doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2020.2971153.
Cassiers, G., Faust, S., Orlt, M., Standaert, F.-X. (2021). Towards tight
random probing security. In CRYPTO 2021, Malkin, T. and Peikert, C.
(eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Chari, S., Jutla, C.S., Rao, J.R., Rohatgi, P. (1999). Towards sound
approaches to counteract power-analysis attacks. In CRYPTO’99,
Wiener, M.J. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Duc, A., Dziembowski, S., Faust, S. (2014). Unifying leakage models:
From probing attacks to noisy leakage. In EUROCRYPT 2014, Nguyen,
P.Q. and Oswald, E. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Ishai, Y., Sahai, A., Wagner, D. (2003). Private circuits: Securing hardware
against probing attacks. In CRYPTO 2003, Boneh, D. (ed.). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Prest, T., Goudarzi, D., Martinelli, A., Passelègue, A. (2019). Unifying
leakage models on a Rényi day. In CRYPTO 2019, Boldyreva, A. and
Micciancio, D. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Rivain, M. and Prouff, E. (2010). Provably secure higher-order masking of
AES. In CHES 2010, Mangard, S. and Standaert, F.-X. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Rossi, M. (2020). Extended security of lattice-based cryptography (Sécurité
étendue de la cryptographie fondée sur les réseaux euclidiens). PhD
Thesis, Paris Sciences et Lettres University [Online]. Available at:
https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-02946399.
Note
1 In practice, such a structure indeed yields concrete probing attacks for
specific choices of gadgets g1 and g2.
OceanofPDF.com

5
Masking Verification
Abdul Rahman TALEB
CryptoExperts, Paris, France
5.1. Introduction
Chapter 4 formally discussed proving the security of masked
implementations in different leakage models. The main leakage models
introduced are the noisy leakage model, the (robust) random probing model
and the (robust) probing model. While the noisy leakage model best
describes the reality of physical leakage, it remains challenging to establish
security proofs in this model. Meanwhile, thanks to the security reduction in
the noisy model with regard to the probing model, going through the
intermediate random probing model, it remains interesting to construct
masked circuits that are proven secure in the latter two models. Hence, this
chapter focuses on verifying security properties in the probing and random
probing models.
There are mainly two types of proofs for security in the (random) probing
models, as presented in Chapter 4, distribution-based proofs and
(exhaustive or generic) simulation-based proofs. Generic simulation-based
proofs are handmade, which makes them very error prone, even at small
masking orders. For this reason, automatic tools are built to apply
exhaustive simulation (or distribution) based verification. The goal is to
explore all possible sets of observations on the circuit up to a specific size
defined by the security order and check the desired property. In the context
of distribution-based verification, the distribution of each set of
observations must be independent of the secret inputs. For simulation-based
verification, each set must be perfectly simulatable using only a subset of
the input shares to the circuit. The bound on the size of the subsets is
defined by the property (e.g. t-NI, t-SNI, etc.). These verification techniques
extend to the random probing model. In this case, we consider all possible
sets of observations on the circuit without an upper bound on the size to
approximate the failure probability function f(p).

In this chapter, we will discuss how automatic verification tools work.
Section 5.2 starts by presenting the general verification procedure that any
automatic tool applies. It mainly consists of an exploration algorithm to
enumerate sets of variables on the circuit and a verification algorithm called
on each set to check the desired property. Then, sections 5.3 and 5.4
introduce different instantiations of the verification and exploration
algorithms, respectively. While the goal is not to exhaust all existing
automatic verification techniques, we will present some important ones
relevant to understanding the main idea and show the diversity of the
techniques in the field.
We encourage the reader to read Chapter 4 first, as in the following, we use
the same notations and formalism and suppose that the notions of leakage
models are acquired. Also, all circuits and operations are defined over the
field 
. We point out, for each described algorithm, when it can be
easily extended to larger fields. When we describe a circuit, we define the
intermediate variables with respect to the order of the operations. The latter
is the standard order of operations in an algebraic expression. For example,
to compute the variable c = a · b + ((d + e) + f), we get the intermediate
results a · b, d + e and (d + e) + f.
5.2. General procedure
Automatic verification tools consist of two main algorithms: exploration
and verification. Given a randomized arithmetic circuit 
 and a property to
check, the exploration algorithm goes through all possible sets of variables
(or probes) on the circuit up to a size imposed by the property. Then, the
verification algorithm is executed on each of the enumerated sets to check if
the property is satisfied. For instance, Algorithm 5.1 illustrates this
procedure for checking the t-NI property on an ℓ-to-m n-share circuit 
with t < n. We recall that a circuit is t-NI if any set 
 of at most t probes
on 
 can be perfectly simulated using at most t input shares of each of the ℓ
input sharings.
Algorithm 5.1, which we call Explore, is a simple instantiation of the
exploration algorithm, which enumerates all possible sets of at most t
variables. We will see later that different optimizations can be applied to

Explore to avoid checking all sets. Then, Explore calls the verification
algorithm Verify on each enumerated set, taking as additional input the
description of the circuit and the property to verify. Verify then verifies that
the set of variables given as input satisfies the t-NI property. Otherwise, it
returns False, ending the execution and meaning that the circuit is not t-NI.
Such a set that does not respect the property is generally called a failure set.
Algorithm 5.1. Explore for t-NI

EXAMPLE 5.1.–
Consider a randomized arithmetic circuit 
 that implements the
following first-order multiplication on shared input
:
such that c = c0 + c1 = a · b = (a0 + a1) · (b0 + b1). We can execute
Algorithm 5.1 on this circuit to check if it is 1-NI. We first get the set V,
as described in the algorithm, of 13 variables:
Then, for the 1-NI property, we consider subsets of V formed of a single
variable. A simple implementation of Explore and Verify would be to go
through all of the 13 subsets and check that each variable contains in its
expression at most one share of  and one share of  or a fresh additive
random value (since the random value can then be used to mask the
expression and break the dependence with any input share, considering that
it is uniformly generated, as explained in the previous chapter). Namely,
each variable of the form ai, bj, ai · bj for 0 ≤ i, j ≤ 1 contains at most one
input share of each input sharing in its expression. Then, the intermediate
variables which contain an additive random value in their expressions are
c0, (r0,1 + a0 · b1), ((r0,1 + a0 · b1) + a1 · b0) and c1. Considering each of
these variables independently, its distribution is independent of any input
share with the addition of the random value, which is used nowhere else
(this can be checked by computing the truth table). The algorithm finally
outputs that 
 is 1-NI.

Notice that the instantiation of Verify in the above example is simulation-
based. We only suppose that the random values used by the circuit are
generated uniformly at random and do not assume the same on the input
sharings. In fact, the definition of t-NI does not suppose the uniformity of
the input sharings. Whenever an input share appears in the expression of a
variable and is not masked by a uniform random value, we consider that it
is needed to produce a perfect simulation of the variable. Indeed, as
explained in Chapter 4, the additional uniformity constraint on the input
sharings directly implies probing security.
As we saw, verifying basic probing-like properties on first-order
implementations can sometimes be manageable with simple exploration and
verification algorithms. However, such simple procedures do not scale well
when considering larger sets of variables. Such scenarios occur when
considering, for example, higher order implementations or robust probing
properties and (robust) random probing properties. In this case, determining
the number of input shares necessary for a perfect simulation can be
difficult, depending on the number of variables to consider and the
complexity of their expressions. Recall that an algorithm must do this in an
automated fashion.

EXAMPLE 5.2.–
Consider a two-share randomized arithmetic circuit 
 with input
. Suppose the following variables occur
in the circuit:
where 
 are uniform random variables. Observe that
all of the shares of the input  appear in 
. Also, no random variable
appears only once in the set 
, meaning no random value can mask
any expression in 
. However, an automatic verification algorithm
must still be able to judge that no input shares are necessary to simulate
the variables perfectly. We can rewrite the expressions in the set 
 as:
and check that 
 is equivalent to the following set of variables:
Indeed, if we can perfectly simulate the variables in 
 (respectively, 
),
then we can also perfectly simulate the variables in 
 (respectively, 
)
with some substitutions. Now, the random value r1 only appears in the
expression of w1 in 
, which means that it can be used to mask the
expression of w1 as a uniform random value. Finally, we can check that
perfectly simulating 
 is equivalent to perfectly simulating the set {r1, r2,
r0 + r2}, which does not involve any input share. We can check by some
distribution computation that all three sets have identical distributions
conditioned on any realization of the input a and the corresponding shares
(a0, a1).

All of this raises the need for efficient verification algorithms. Many
instantiations of Verify exist in the literature. Some are distribution-based,
while others are simulation-based. In the next section, we will see some
important instantiations widely used by the community. Then, section 5.4
discusses instantiations of Explore to explore all sets of variables, taking
into account the underlying leakage model and the property to be verified.
We will discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each algorithm along
the way.
5.3. Verify: verification mechanisms for a set
of variables
This section will first revisit the distribution-based technique to instantiate
Verify. Indeed, it has already been shown in some examples in Chapter 4
that it becomes quickly exponential as the number of involved variables
grows. The goal is to present some optimizations to show how distribution-
based techniques can verify security notions such as composition. Then, we
will mainly focus on widely used simulation-based techniques which
manipulate the variables’ symbolic expressions and have proven more
efficient than the former distribution techniques. We insist that whatever the
instantiation of Verify, an exponential cost is still present in Explore when
we need to iterate over subsets of variables on the circuit. Nevertheless,
with a sufficiently efficient Verify algorithm and optimizations on Explore,
we can check the security of circuits and gadgets of reasonable sizes for
concrete implementations.
5.3.1. Distribution-based Verify
Given an n-share ℓ-to-m circuit 
, and a set of variables 
 on the circuit
and a 
-valued random variable 
, distribution-based procedures
essentially verify the statistical independence between
 and 
 (recall that Enc is an n-
additive encoding producing a uniform sharing of each of the ℓ inputs). A
direct approach to check this independence is by verifying that the
following equality holds 
, 
:

[5.1]
Note that this verification is done to prove probing security. In other words,
to prove t-probing security, Explore iterates on all sets 
 of at most t
probes and then calls Verify on each to verify the above equality. We can
extend this verification to other simulation-based notions, which require the
set of probes to be perfectly simulated using only a subset of the input
shares. For instance, in the context of t-NI, each set 
 of at most t probes
must be perfectly simulated using at most t shares of each input sharing.
Then, if we suppose that the input sharings are independent and uniform,
there must exist a collection of sets I = (I1, …, Iℓ) such that ∀i ∊ [1; ℓ], |Ii| ≤
t and the following holds 
, 
,
:
Observe that knowing that 
 directly gives 
. This
ensures that a simulator can use the shares 
 to perfectly simulate 
,
exactly like in the case where it would have access to the complete sharing
. While the original non-interference notion does not suppose the input
sharings to be independent and uniform, proving t-NI using distributions of
variables requires it (generally, t-probing security can be seen as a
specialization of t-NI with independent and uniform input sharings). Once
equation [5.1] is defined, it can be adapted to other notions. For t-SNI, for
example, we restrict the sizes of |Ii| to t1 for all i ∊ [1; ℓ], the number of
intermediate variables in 
.
Since we suppose that all input sharings are uniform, testing equation [5.1]
amounts to checking that 
, 
,
:

[5.2]
where 
.
In this case, an instantiation of Verify tries to find the collection of sets I of
the right size such that equation [5.2] holds, depending on the considered
property. For instance, checking that the equation holds can be done by
computing truth tables for all possible realizations of the involved variables.
Since we are working on 
, some optimizations can be applied to
reduce the complexity. Namely, we can use the following proven result.
THEOREM 5.1.–
Let 
, 
 be two sets of binary random variables. Then 
 and 
 are
statistically independent, if and only if 
, 
 we have:
for any fixed set of values 
, 
Theorem 5.1 implies that it is necessary and sufficient to verify that
equation [5.2] holds for one fixed realization, for example, w = 1, 
,
instead of trying all combinations of realizations. On the other hand, we
must compute this for all subsets of 
 and Ii for i ∊ [1; n].

EXAMPLE 5.3.–
Consider a 3-share randomized arithmetic circuit 
 with input
 such that 
 are
uniform and independent sharings. Suppose that we want to check if a
set of probes 
 on 
 is perfectly simulatable with I =
({0, 1}, {2}). Then, we need to check the following equalities:
In addition, we also need to consider eight more equations with
combinations of both secrets. Finally, we need to check the same set of 14
equations when considering the realization of the probe w2 = 1, then both
w1 = 1 and w2 = 1, for a total of 42 equalities to check.
Note that to compute the realization of a set of binary variables to 1, we can
use Reduced Order Binary Decision Diagrams (ROBDD). In a nutshell, the
goal is to represent each variable in the circuit by a corresponding ROBDD
using the inputs to the circuit (including random variables) to make the
computation of the probabilities more efficient.
This verification method remains heavy and does not scale well when the
number of shares and the size of the circuit grow. Meanwhile, the main
advantage of this method is that it is complete. We call an implementation
of Verify complete when a set of wires 
 is considered a failure set by
Verify if and only if it is a failure set for the desired property. We will see
later in the chapter that some methods are more efficient at the expense of

being slightly less complete. When a set 
 is considered a failure set by a
verification algorithm without actually being a failure for the desired
property, we call it a false positive.
Another novel approach for testing the independence of probed variables
from the secrets over 
 was introduced in the literature using the Fourier
expansion of Boolean functions. The method considers uniform input
sharings. On a first-order (i.e. 2-share) example, an input secret a has a
sharing 
, where r is a uniform random value and ⊕ is the
XOR operation. This technique consists of computing each gate’s Fourier
expansion in the circuit and checking that no coefficient containing only the
secret value a appears in the expansion without any uniform random
variable, directly implying that the gate is statistically independent of the
secret a. For instance, a XOR gate taking as input the secret a and a uniform
random value r′ has the Fourier expansion F(a ⊕ r′) = a · r′, where a only
appears in a coefficient with a random masking value. Hence, the gate is
independent of the secret. Meanwhile, an AND gate taking as input a and r′
has the Fourier expansion 
,
where a appears in a coefficient without any random mask, so the gate is
not statistically independent of the secret. We can check the statistical
independence by computing the expansion of each gate in the circuit using
the input shares and random values, and this method is complete.
Meanwhile, extending the verification to check composition notions such as
SNI and PINI is not trivial. Moreover, for higher-order implementations, we
need to check several combinations of gates and compute the Fourier
expansion of the combinations, which becomes very expensive. Some
methods exist to approximate the Fourier expansion faster, making the
verification possible but not complete anymore.
5.3.2. Simulation-based Verify
Simulation-based instantiations of Verify manipulate the symbolic
expressions of the variables to conclude the simulatability of a set of probes
for the property. In the following, we present a substitution- and
transformation-based method that works on any gadget or circuit structure
but is only sometimes complete. Then, we present a complete method
restricted to specific gadget structures covering most of the widely used

constructions in the literature. Both techniques can be generalized to any
field 
. However, we assume 
 for simplicity of presentation.
5.3.2.1. Substitution rules algorithm
Given a set of probes 
, a first approach is to apply a certain number of
transformations on the probes’ symbolic expressions until we can precisely
determine the input shares necessary to produce a perfect simulation. The
procedure relies on three main rules. Algorithm 5.2 gives the instantiation to
check t-SNI, which can be adapted to any other property. We can see in the
algorithm that each rule is applied a certain number of times until no more
transformations can be done on the expressions, in which case, we have no
choice but to use the input shares appearing in the expressions.

Algorithm 5.2. Verify as described in section 5.3.2.1
for t-SNI
Rule 1: the first rule is to extract the input shares that appear in all of the
symbolic expressions in 
, outputting (I1, …, Iℓ) as shown on line 4 of
Algorithm 5.2. Indeed, a trivial way of perfectly simulating these probes is
to give all of the input shares involved to the simulator. Then, if the sizes of
the sets I1, …, Iℓ already satisfy the desired property, we can stop the
verification and consider the set a success case.
Otherwise, we can apply additional rules to try and reduce the sizes of the
sets of shares necessary until we can satisfy the property (or not, which
leads to a failure). We can use the observation already presented in Chapter
4, where we say that an additive random value to a symbolic expression
appearing only once in the set 
 can mask this expression. This

transformation is performed by Rule 2 to output a new equivalent set of
expressions on Line 9 of the algorithm.
Rule 2: for each expression 
, if wi = A + r where 
 is a
uniform random value and does not appear in any expression in
, nor in A, then replace 
 by an equivalent set:
We have previously seen that perfectly simulating 
 is equivalent to
perfectly simulating the output of Rule 2 on 
, and that both sets have
identical distributions. Then, we can loop on Rule 2 and Rule 1 as long as
we find new random values that can mask other expressions or until Rule 1
exits with success. This loop is executed on Lines 3 through 10 of
Algorithm 5.2. Note that looping on Rule 2 is sometimes necessary as
masking an expression can make new random values appear only once in
other expressions, which can then be seen as masks.
At the end of the loop on the first two rules, if Verify did not return True,
the set 
 is considered a potential failure set. Precisely, no more random
values can be used as masks, and too many input shares are necessary for a
perfect simulation. Meanwhile, we can still apply another rule by observing
that probing {w1, w1 + w2} is equivalent to probing {w1, w2}, as in the
following example.

EXAMPLE 5.4.–
Let 
 be a randomized circuit with input
. Let
 a set of
probes on 
, where 
 is a uniform random value. Suppose that
we are checking 1-NI. Applying Rule 2 on 
 will not perform any
transformations because r0 appears twice. Since both input shares of 
appear in the expressions in 
, Verify concludes that 
 is a failure
set. Meanwhile, we can see that w1 = w2 + a1, i.e. w2 is a subexpression
of w1. Hence, a simulator that can perfectly simulate 
 is equivalent to
a simulator that can perfectly simulate 
, up to some
linear transformations on the expressions. Now the random value r0
only appears once in 
, so it can be used to mask the
expression of w2. We conclude that 
 is equivalent to
, where only one share of  is necessary for a
perfect simulation.
We generalize the above example to the following rule (Rule 3), executed
by Verify whenever Rule 1 and Rule 2 are not enough to conclude. On
Lines 11 through 13 of Algorithm 5.2, we execute this rule k times, where k
is given as input to the algorithm.
Rule 3: for each 
, if the number of variables in the
expression of wi + wj is less than the number of variables in the expression
of wi, then replace 
 by an equivalent set:
Otherwise, if the number of variables in the expression of wi + wj is less
than the number of variables in the expression of wj, then replace 
 by an
equivalent set:

Stop when all couples of expressions in 
 are visited.
After executing Rule 3, we go back to looping on Rule 1 and Rule 2 again
to check if we can use any random value to mask new expressions. We get
to the final main loop of the algorithm on Lines 2 through 14. The
termination condition of applying the different steps is when no more
transformations can be applied to the initial set of wires. If we never output
True in the main loop, the algorithm eventually returns False, meaning that
too many input shares are involved in the variables’ expressions to satisfy
the property.
We can see that such implementation of Verify is sometimes not complete.
Nevertheless, it detects all possible attacks, so it is conservative. Further
optimizations and elimination techniques are implemented in recent
verification tools to avoid false positives as much as possible. For instance,
we can execute Rule 3 indeterminately if we modify 
. Since the criterion
is to replace an expression w with another w′ with fewer variables in the
expression, we are sure that the rule terminates. This induces an execution
time overhead. Many tools try to find trade-offs between execution time and
completeness.
EXERCISE 5.1.–
Consider some randomized arithmetic circuit 
 with input
. Now, let
 be a set of probes on 
 with 
 {a0 · b0 + (a0 · b1 + r0,1) + (a0 ·
b2 + r0,2) + (a0 · b3 + r0,3) + r1,0 + r2,0 + r3,0, r1,0 + r2,0 + r3,0, r0,1 + r2,1
+ r3,1, r0,2 + r1,2 + r3,2, r0,3 + r1,3 + r2,3, r0,2 + r1,2, r0,3 + r1,3, r0,1 + r2,1 +
r3,1, a0 · b0 + (a0 · b1 + r0,1) + (a0 · b2 + r0,2) + (a0 · b3 + r0,3)}. How
many input shares of  and  are needed to produce a perfect
simulation of 
 after running the three rules of the verification? Can
we reduce further these numbers of shares?

Now let us consider another randomized arithmetic circuit 
 with the
same inputs and a set of probes
. How many input shares of  and  are needed to produce a perfect
simulation of 
 after running the three rules of the verification? Can we
further reduce these numbers of shares?
Finally, if we want to check properties under the hypothesis of input
sharings uniformity (e.g. t-probing security), we can apply the following
trick without changing the verification procedure. For each secret input a to
the circuit, we compute its sharing as
, where r0, …, rn−1 are
now internal random values to the circuit, but we allow no probes to the
internal computation of a + r0 + … + rn−1. Then, the failure condition for t-
probing security would be that the secret input a is required by a simulator
to produce a perfect simulation of a given set of probes.
5.3.2.2. Linear algebra algorithm
In the following, we discuss another instantiation of Verify based on an
algebraic characterization of the variables. This characterization introduces
a complete and efficient verification method. It restricts the types of circuits
as input but covers most masking gadgets for standard operations such as
addition, multiplication and refreshing. Covering these gadgets is satisfying
in composition, where we construct big, secure circuits from smaller secure
gadgets.
To this purpose, we slightly modify the notations in this section. For an n-
share ℓ-to-m gadget, we denote its input and output sharings as column
vectors 
, 
,
respectively. We also group all the gadget’s random variables in a column
vector 
 of uniformly and independently drawn random values.
We finally consider “vectors” of probes 
 instead of “sets” of probes.
Given a vector of probes 
, our goal is to precisely determine the
expressions that uniform random values can mask. The strategy from
section 5.3.2.1 applies a set of rules in the hope of masking additional input

[5.3]
shares. In this section, we provide a linear algebra-based method that
determines the exact expressions which can be masked by random values
and those that cannot. Then, the idea is to provide the remaining input
shares to the simulator as they are potentially needed for a perfect
simulation. We focus on gadgets where all random values are additive to the
variables. In other words, we write the output vectors 
 as:
where F is an arbitrary arithmetic circuit (composed of addition and
multiplication gates over 
) and R is a linear arithmetic circuit (composed
of addition gates over 
). With this definition of the gadget’s outputs, we
can write the expression of any internal wire w of the gadget as:
for some arithmetic function 
 and some constant vector
.
To determine the random variables that can be used for masking, we use a
strategy based on Gaussian elimination. Let 
 be a
vector of t probes. Since each expression wi can be written as in equation
[5.3], we can construct the following matrix 
:
where the ith row of S is the vector 
 representing the dependence of wi
on the corresponding random values of the gadget. To check that a random
rj for 1 ≤ j ≤ ρ appears only once in all the expressions in 
, we can easily
check that the jth column in S has a single non-zero value. By applying a
row reduction algorithm on S, we obtain its row-reduced echelon matrix S′,
which up to some permutations is equal to:

with S′ = N · S where 
 is an invertible matrix, 
 is
the identity matrix, 
 and
 are the matrices with zero coefficients, and
 is a matrix with any coefficients. We can apply the
same transformations to 
 using N to get 
 defined as:
The transformations applied to expressions in 
 are linear and equivalent
to the ones applied during Rule 3 of Algorithm 5.2. Since N is invertible,
and the operations performed on rows of S are linear, then perfectly
simulating 
 is equivalent to perfectly simulating 
 (
 is obtained as
 and 
 is obtained as 
). By closely looking at the
expressions in 
, we can check that the first k rows in S′ correspond to
the random dependence of the first k expressions in 
. In other words, for
each 1 ≤ i ≤ k, we can write 
 as:
for some arithmetic function 
 and 
 is
the jth row vector of S′. Since S′ is in row-reduced form and thanks to the
identity matrix Ik, k, each such vector 
 has its leading coefficient non-
zero on the ith column and all other coefficients of S′ on the same column
are zeros. Therefore, we are sure that the random value corresponding to
column i appears only in the expression of 
 among expressions in 
and is additive. Therefore, we can use this random to mask the expression
of 
, and its distribution is thus independent of any input share and
mutually independent of the other expressions 
 for j ∊ [1; t] \ {i}.

Similarly, for each row k + 1 ≤ j ≤ t, we can write 
 as:
for some arithmetic function 
 and 
 the
vector with zero coefficients. This means that each such expression 
contains no random value and cannot be masked. A perfect simulation of
 eventually requires all of the input shares appearing in
. As a result, we conclude that the input shares needed to
perfectly simulate 
 are exactly the ones appearing in the expressions of
. Thanks to the exactness of the row reduction, we are
sure that the sets of input shares are of minimal sizes.

EXAMPLE 5.5.–
Let us take a toy example to apply this technique. Consider the vector of
expressions
on a gadget with input
. The
vector of randoms used by the gadget is 
. Let
us now construct the matrix S as explained above.
By performing row reduction on S, we obtain:
Using N, we can construct the vector of expressions 
 equivalent to
 such that:
We can see that the only expression in 
 that does not contain any
random value is 
, and each of the other expressions
contains a random value that is additive and does not appear anywhere else

in 
. Precisely, 
 is masked by r1 or r2, 
 is masked by r3 and 
 is
masked by r4. Consequently, perfectly simulating 
 requires the input
shares that only appear in the expression of 
, which are a0, b0, a1 and b1.
By perfectly simulating 
 using these input shares, we can also perfectly
simulate 
 using the same input shares by first simulating 
 and then
computing 
 as 
. We could have permuted some rows of S′ to
place the zero rows at the bottom, as described above. However, this
additional step was only necessary for the clarity of the presentation.
The Verify instantiation method described in this section is complete
because it determines the minimal sets of input shares necessary for a
perfect simulation. In addition, its complexity is exactly the complexity of
performing row reduction on the vectors of randomness, which can be
estimated to 
 if we use a simple row reduction algorithm.
Meanwhile, it is restricted to specific types of constructions, where all
random variables are additive to the wires of the gadget. The literature
extended this technique to support limited nonlinear operations between
input shares and random values. In a nutshell, on a 2-to-1 n-share gadget,
for instance, the output must be expressed as
, where 
 are distinct
random vectors used by the gadget. This construction covers composed
gadgets such as a multiplication gadget, which first starts by refreshing both
inputs. Finally, if we want to check properties under the hypothesis of input
sharings uniformity, we can apply the same trick discussed at the end of
section 5.3.2.1.
5.4. Explore: exploration mechanisms for all
sets of variables
In section 5.3, we described different ways of defining the procedure Verify
to judge if a given set of probes or variables represents a failure for the
checked property. We now discuss the next main algorithm of any
automatic verification tool, Explore, which explores all the possible sets of
variables of the circuit and passes each as input to Verify (as described in

[5.4]
Algorithm 5.1). Indeed, scanning all possible sets of variables of a given
size on a circuit has inevitable exponential complexity. In this section, we
describe different optimizations leading to a practical speed-up to test
circuits and gadgets of reasonable sizes. We first show tricks specific to the
probing model, then move on to exploration in the random probing model.
Finally, we end with a discussion about exploring sets of variables, while
taking physical defaults into account.
5.4.1. Probing model
Security properties in the probing model are easier to verify than in the
random probing model. Given a security parameter t, we need to call Verify
on all possible sets of at most t variables, where t ≤ n − 1. For a gadget or
circuit of s wires, this amounts to enumerating at most the following
number of sets:
When checking a property in the probing model, it suffices to encounter one
set representing a failure. The rest of this section exhibits two essential
optimizations that reduce the number of sets to consider for the verification.
5.4.1.1. Considering larger sets
The first optimization comes from the fact that if a set of probes 
 is a
failure for the property, we can always find a set 
 such that 
,
which is also a failure. Let us take the example for t-SNI with t < n and a n-
share 2-to-m circuit 
 with input 
 (we can also generalize to ℓ
inputs), which is not t-SNI for t < n. Suppose now that there exists a set 
of t1 internal probes and t2 output probes such that t1 + t2 < t and a perfect
simulation of probes in 
 requires sets of input shares (I1, I2) such that |I1|
> t1 or |I2| > t1. Without loss of generality, let |I1| > t1. Now let 
 be any
subset of [1; n] \ I1 such that 
, and let
. Observe that 
 with t2 output probes and
 internal probes. Since 
, a perfect simulation of

probes in 
 will require sets 
 (the set I2 does not change
since we only add probes from input shares of ). We now have
. Thus, 
 is also a failure set for t-SNI.
Hence, to check if a given circuit is t-SNI, we only need to check if sets of
exactly t probes satisfy the property instead of checking all sets of ≤ t
probes. If no such set is a failure for t-SNI, then we are sure that all sets of
smaller size also satisfy the property. The total number of sets to check in
equation [5.4] is reduced to 
 sets. Note that this can be generalized to any
property in the probing model.
At this point, Explore iterates over all sets of probes of size exactly t and
then calls Verify on each of them. For each such set 
, Verify determines
the sets of input shares (I1, …, Iℓ) necessary to perfectly simulate 
 and
checks if the size of these sets respects the property. Let us suppose that 
is not a failure set, meaning that (I1, …, Iℓ) are authorized for a perfect
simulation. Now, we can construct a set 
 such that 
 and a
perfect simulation of 
 requires the same sets of input shares (I1, …, Iℓ).
If we can construct 
, then Explore can eliminate all subsets of 
 from
the verification since we are sure they will not be failure sets.
EXAMPLE 5.6.–
Let us consider the randomized arithmetic circuit 
, which implements
the second-order multiplication from Chapter 4. We recall the
expressions of the output sharing (the full description is given in the
chapter):
To check 2-NI, we need to consider 
 pairs of potential probes.
Let us start for instance with 
, which
requires the sets of input shares I1 = I2 = {0} for a perfect simulation

(determined using any instantiation of Verify from section 5.3.2). This is not
a failure set for 2-NI. Now, let
of six potential probes. We can verify that 
 requires the same sets of
input shares I1, I2 for a perfect simulation, so it is not a failure set either.
Thus, we are sure any subset of 
 is not a failure set. We can immediately
eliminate the remaining 
 subsets of 
 from the
verification.
The example above demonstrates that we can eliminate many sets of probes
from the verification with a single set. The extension of the set of probes
with additional probes must be carefully done in order to reduce the
complexity of the verification. Moreover, the implementation of Verify
must allow quick checking if a superset of a previous set would require the
same sets of input shares. If done correctly, Explore needs only to iterate a
few of the 
 sets to conclude on all sets. Current implementations in the
automatic verification field show that such optimization on the exploration
algorithm drastically reduces the practical complexity.
5.4.1.2. Eliminating weaker observations
In simulation-based proofs, we consider that variables which contain
“more” input shares in their expressions are more advantageous for an
attacker. For example, for a 3-share circuit with input 
, if
an attacker can probe either a0 or a0 + a1, they will indeed choose to probe
the second variable, which involves two input shares. In fact, by probing a0
+ a1, only another probe a2 is needed to retrieve the secret input a. We can
apply a preprocessing phase to the input circuit variables to eliminate such
weaker observations and reduce the total number of wires before
enumerating the sets with Explore. In Algorithm 5.3, we present a
preprocessing algorithm that eliminates different types of weak
observations on a circuit with two inputs. It can be generalized to circuits
with more inputs.

Algorithm 5.3. Preprocessing to be executed at the
beginning of Explore
First, on Lines 2, 3 and 4, we remove input shares and products of input
shares called elementary deterministic probes. If a set of probes 
functionally depends on t input shares, we can always make it depend on
t+t0 input shares by adding elementary deterministic probes. For example, if
 does not depend on the input share a0, then the set 
and any set of the form 
 do. With this
optimization, the definition of a failure set slightly changes for some
properties. In the case of t-NI, a failure set 
 such that 
 is one

where at least 
 shares (instead of t + 1) of any of the inputs are
needed for a perfect simulation. Indeed, if 
 needs 
 shares, then
we can construct a failure for t-NI by completing 
 with additional input
shares as above.
It is similarly the case for t-probing security. The definition meanwhile
remains the same in the case of t-SNI and t-PINI, since we already reason
on the number of intermediate probes in the set we consider.
EXAMPLE 5.7.–
Let us consider a circuit 
 with input
.
Suppose that we would like to check 3-NI and let:
be a set of potential observations. In order to perfectly simulate this set
for 3-NI, Verify concludes that the sets of input shares needed are I1 =
{0, 1, 2} and I2 = {0}. We can construct a failure for 3-NI from this set
by considering, for example, 
, where 4 > t shares
of  are required for a perfect simulation of only three probes.
Next, the goal of the loop on all variables from Lines 5 to 15 of the
algorithm is to keep in V the variables that contain the most input shares, on
the condition that the same random values are used.

EXAMPLE 5.8.–
Let 
 be some circuit with input
. Let w1 = a0 · b1 + r0
and w2 = a0 · b1 + r0 + a1 · b0 = w1 + a1 · b0 be intermediate variables of
 for some uniform random value r0. For the set 
, a
perfect simulation requires the input shares a0 and b1. Meanwhile, a
perfect simulation of 
 requires both shares of both
inputs. Hence, instead of calling Verify on both sets 
 and 
, we
can consider 
 where more input shares are required for perfect
simulation.
We can generalize the above example as depicted in Algorithm 5.3. Namely,
if two variables w, w′ ∊ V use the same random values, while w′ contains
more input shares than w, we can remove w from V. It is proven that a
failure set for a property occurs when considering V \ {w} if and only if it
occurs when considering V.
EXAMPLE 5.9.–
If we apply Algorithm 5.3 to the second-order multiplication discussed
earlier, and in Chapter 4, which initially contains 27 variables, we end
up with only seven variables. Precisely, we first remove variables {a0,
a1, a2, b0, b1, b2}, then products of input shares {ai · bj}∀0≤ i, j≤2. Finally,
with the last step of the algorithm, we can check that the following
variables are also eliminated from the set: {r0,1 + a0 · b1, r0,1 + a0 · b1 +
a1 · b0, r0,2 + a0 · b2, r0,2 + a0 · b2 + a2 · b0, r1,2 + a1 · b2 }·

[5.5]
REMARK 5.1.–
For the optimization described in this section, we suppose that Explore
enumerates all sets of at most t probes. If we want to merge this
optimization with the one presented in section 5.4.1.1, where we only
consider sets of exactly t probes, we must keep the input shares in the
set of variables. In the case of Algorithm 5.3, the variables {ai, bi}0≤i<n
must be kept in the set V. This is because of the result presented at the
beginning of section 5.4.1.1, where we use such input shares to
construct failure sets of size t.
5.4.2. Random probing model
In the probing model, it is sufficient to find one failure set to conclude that
the circuit is insecure. As discussed in the previous section, many
optimizations can be applied to find one as soon as possible or eliminate
unnecessary verification. Meanwhile, verifying a security property in the
random probing model amounts to finding all failure sets to compute the
failure probability ε since each variable can leak independently with
probability p ∊ [0, 1]. Recall from Chapter 4 that ε can be expressed as a
function f(p).
For example, to determine the (p, ε = f(p))-random probing security of an n-
share ℓ-to-m circuit 
 with a total of s internal wires, we need to compute:
The coefficient ci is equal to the number of sets 
 of exactly i wires that
are not independent of the secret inputs. In other words, ci sets of i wires are
considered failures by Verify. Similarly to proofs in the probing model, we
can use the simulation-based definition to check that a perfect simulation of
such a set 
 requires at most n − 1 shares of each input sharing, directly
implying the independence of the secret when the sharings are uniformly
and independently generated. The exploration algorithm then needs to

enumerate a total of 
 sets. We insist that in the
random probing model, the s wires include the different copies of the same
variable produced using copy gates, contrary to proofs in the probing
model, where we do not need to consider the copies. An instantiation of
Explore for (p, ε)-random probing security is described in Algorithm 5.4.
The procedure then returns the list of coefficients for f(p).
In the case of (t, p, f(p))-random probing composability for a circuit 
 with
input 
 and output 
, a set of internal wires 
(i.e. without output shares) fails if there exists a collection of sets J = (J1,
…, Jm) such that ∀i ∊ [1; m], |Ji| ≤ t, and a perfect simulation of
 requires more than t shares of any of the ℓ input sharings. In
order to compute f(p) in this case, we need to consider each possible set of t
output shares of each output sharing and check if 
 along with any of
these sets represent a failure. In other words, for each possible collection of
sets J as described above, we compute a list of coefficients 
as described in Algorithm 5.4, with the condition that at most, t shares of
each input are required to perfectly simulate each set of probes along with
. After computing these coefficients for each possible J, the final
coefficients for f(p) would be equal to:

[5.6]
Algorithm 5.4. Explore for (p, f(p))-random probing
security
The total number of calls to Verify is larger than in the case of random
probing security for a total of:
where the factor 
 is due to the number of sets containing t shares of
each of the m outputs.
In the same context of composition, we can also compute a circuit’s probe
distribution table (PDT). Each entry of the table is a different function

fI,J(p) indexed by sets of input shares I and output shares J, instead of the
number of shares as in the previous properties. Computing the PDT is
similar to verifying random probing composability. In other words, we have
to consider all possible collections of sets J = (J1, …, Jm) such that ∀i ∊ [1;
m], |Ji| ≤ t. Then, for each set of internal wires 
, instead of checking if it
is a failure as in random probing composability, we determine the sets of
input shares I = (I1, …, Iℓ) necessary to produce a perfect simulation of
, and then we increment the coefficient 
 of the
corresponding function fI,J(p). A complete instantiation is described in
Algorithm 5.5. In this case, we call the function SIS (for Sets of Input
Shares) instead of Verify, which outputs the sets of input shares necessary
for a perfect simulation instead of checking if the set represents a failure for
the property. Note that both functions are similar; Verify and SIS can be
instantiated in the same way with simulation-based approaches, but SIS
stops at the step of determining the sets of input shares, while Verify
additionally tests if their sizes respect the property. The number of calls to
SIS is the most expensive compared to other properties since we need to
consider 2n·m+s sets.

Algorithm 5.5. Explore for computing the probe
distribution table
For any of the above properties, we can see that computing the failure
functions is very costly since we need to enumerate all sets of wires without
an upper bound on the size to consider. In addition, specific optimizations
of eliminating sets of wires from the verification in the probing model
cannot be used in this case. It is generally infeasible to compute all the
coefficients, even for small four-share circuits. The rest of this section will
discuss some optimizations applicable to the random probing model, which
can help accelerate the verification.

5.4.2.1. Incompressible failure sets
An incompressible failure set 
 is a set that is considered a failure set for
the checked property, and such that none of the subsets of 
 are also
failures (i.e. 
 such that 
 is also a failure set). Then, all
supersets of an incompressible failure set are failures. The proof of this
property is very similar to the one exhibited at the beginning of section
5.4.1.1 for using larger sets in the probing model. The goal is to avoid
enumerating sets containing incompressible failure sets. When computing
the failure function f(p), Explore iterates on sets of wires of size 0 to s. We
can benefit from this increasing size to store at each step the set of
incompressible failure sets. Then, we will have two kinds of failure sets in
the next step: ones containing incompressible failure sets and ones deemed
failures after calling Verify. In Algorithm 5.6, we exhibit this optimization
on the verification of (p, f(p))-random probing security. Note that the
efficiency of this optimization depends on the data structure used to
implement the set of incompressible sets Inc. For instance, if we implement
Inc as a list, testing if any set in the list is a subset of 
 becomes
expensive as the list size grows. Other, more efficient structures include
hash tables where the keys are the sets of variables or tries (i.e. prefix trees)
for the variables (testing membership of a set 
 of size k inside a trie has
complexity θ(k)). The benefits of this approach generally depend on the size
of the circuit and the sets, since when Inc becomes very big (i.e. a lot of
failures are found within the circuit), then the speed-up becomes close to
enumerating all sets. Also, note that this optimization is not directly
applicable in the case of PDT computation.

EXAMPLE 5.10.–
Let us consider a randomized circuit 
 with input sharing
 of s internal wires.
Suppose that we would like to check (p, f(p))-random probing security
and let 
, where r0 is a uniform random
value. Calling Verify on 
 outputs a failure since both shares of  are
needed to simulate 
 perfectly. Using this conclusion, we can notice
that all the supersets of 
 will also constitute a failure. When
enumerating all sets of size i ≥ 2 to compute coefficient ci of f(p), we
will call Verify on 
 instead of 
 sets. If looking for an
incompressible set is done with an adapted data structure, this can lead
to a significant speedup.
5.4.2.2. Grouping wires with same expressions
In most circuits, several wires have the same value assigned to their
expressions. It is especially the case in the random probing model, where
we also consider copies of variables. Unlike the probing model, where a
variable used several times is probed only once, a variable used k times in
the random probing model passes through k − 1 copy gates of a single input
and two outputs, and thus occurs 2 · k − 1 times in the circuit. Grouping
those variables allows us to reduce the number of wires to consider. Each
variable is then represented by (wi, nbi) where wi is its expression and nbi is
the number of its occurrences in the circuit.

Algorithm 5.6. Explore for (p, f(p))-random probing
security with incompressible sets

EXAMPLE 5.11.–
Consider the randomized circuit 
 which implements the first-order
multiplication from the first example in section 5.2. We can enumerate
all variables as V = {(a0, 3), (a1, 3), (b0, 3), (b1, 3), (r0,1, 3), (a0 · b0, 1),
(a0 · b1, 1), (a1 · b0, 1), (a1 · b1, 1), (r0,1 + a0 · b1, 1), ((r0,1 + a0 · b1) + a1
· b0, 1), (c0, 1), (c1, 1)}. The total number of couples is equal to |V| = 13,
while the actual number of wires used in 
 is equal to 23.
Then, we can directly apply Explore to the shortened list of wires. The
single main difference is that we need to consider the number of
occurrences of the variable when updating the coefficients ci. Instead of the
instruction ci ← ci + 1, we replace it by
, where
updateCoeffs updates several coefficients at a time using the number of
occurrences of the variables in 
. It can be efficiently implemented as a
recursive function that consumes the number of occurrences of the variables
to construct the different failure sets from 
. Note that this optimization
can also be used in the case of PDT computation.

EXAMPLE 5.12. –
Consider the same randomized circuit 
 as in the above example for
the first-order multiplication, where we need to compute the failure
function f(p) for random probing security. Let
. Calling Verify on
 will output that both shares of  and a single share of  are needed
to simulate 
 perfectly. Hence, 
 is a failure set. From 
, the
function updateCoeffs needs to update c3 ← c3 + 9 because we can add
any of the copies of a1 and any of the copies of r0,1 to construct the
same failure set. Then, updateCoeffs must also update c4 ← c4 + 18, c5
← c5 + 15, c6 ← c6 + 6, c7 ← c7 + 1. The biggest failure set we can
construct from 
 is of size 7, where we add all copies of the variables.
Even with these optimizations, computing all coefficients of the failure
function remains very expensive. An instantiation of Explore for random
probing-like properties usually takes as input an upper bound β ≤ s on the
coefficients of f(p) to compute in a reasonable execution time. Instead of
computing (c0, …, cs), Explore computes (c0, …, cβ) and potentially a few
more coefficients since updateCoeffs allows us to update several
coefficients at a time. When Explore cannot compute all coefficients, it
outputs upper and lower bounds on the list of coefficients for f(p). In other
words, let γ ≤ s such that cγ ≠ 0 and ci = 0, ∀i > γ (i.e. cγ is the highest non-
zero coefficient in the list (c0, …, cs)). The lower bound output by Explore
is the list (c0, …, cγ, 0, …, 0), while an upper bound is
, since we can have at most 
 sets of i
variables. Such bounds are sometimes tight enough to have a clear idea of
the behavior of the function f(p) without needing to compute all of the
coefficients. Other approximations include using Monte Carlo techniques
for probability bounding, especially in the case of PDT computation, where
many functions f(p) have to be computed.

5.4.3. Handling physical defaults
As discussed in Chapter 4, physical defaults (such as glitches and
transitions) generate a leakage of several values from a single wire. In the
case of glitches, a variable stored in a register resulting from the
combination of several operands reveals all of its operands (e.g. an
observation on variable c = a + b reveals a and b). In the case of transitions,
two values successively stored in the same memory cell may leak at once
(e.g. an observation on c = e + d preceded by the instruction c = a + b
reveals e + d and a + b). In an automatic verification tool, taking physical
defaults into account changes how we enumerate the different sets of wires.
Typically, a set of t observations 
 may leak more than t wires
simultaneously. Each wire w is then replaced by a set of wires which leak if
w is probed. Some countermeasures can then be added to the description of
the circuit to reduce the leakage due to physical defaults (e.g. storing an
intermediate result in a register). Nevertheless, the same techniques for
Verify and optimizations for Explore can be applied in this context.
In the case of the robust probing model, we can further eliminate weak
observations with Algorithm 5.3 from section 5.4.1.2. We can observe that
when a single probed wire w leads to the leakage of several wires {w1, …,
wk}, an attacker has more advantage in probing w than each of the wires
independently. Hence, we can eliminate w1, …, wk from the set of variables
V. We can easily prove that if an attack does not occur by considering V \
{w1, …, wk}, then no attack occurs by considering V. In the case of t-NI,
only t input shares must be enough to simulate potentially more than t
leaking wires.
In the case of the robust random probing model, we can also apply the
optimizations discussed in section 5.4.2. The main difference is that, as
introduced in Chapter 4, the leakage probability of the different variables is
not independent in the presence of physical defaults. Computing the failure
function then changes with the dependencies between the leaking wires.
5.5. Conclusion
This chapter shows how an automatic verification tool works with Verify
and Explore algorithms. We discussed some of the most deployed

techniques to instantiate the Verify algorithm and optimizations that can be
applied to Explore to reduce the verification complexity. While the chapter
was not exhaustive on all existing techniques, its goal was to gently
introduce the concept of automatic verification of security properties in the
probing and random probing models. Note that such verification tools work
with software-level and hardware-level implementations. Indeed, the
exploration algorithm differs when considering the former or the latter.
Some automatic verification tools also take into account models of
processors and memory management issues to translate physical defaults
and limitations into the verification.
Finally, the field of formal verification is vibrant, and many tools
implementing different techniques and use-cases exist in the literature.
Once we construct a circuit, define how it will be implemented, and the
hypotheses on the surrounding leakage environment, we can choose the tool
that best suits our needs.
5.6. Notes and further references
The first-order and second-order multiplication examples were introduced
in Ishai et al. (2003).
Section 5.3. The distribution-based verification technique from section
5.3.1 was introduced and implemented in the tool SILVER in Knichel
et al. (2020). The fourier expansion technique at the end of section
5.3.1 was introduced and implemented in the tool Rebecca in Bloem et
al. (2018).
The substitution and simulation-based technique from section 5.3.2.1
was introduced and implemented in the tool maskVerif in Barthe et al.
(2015).
The linear algebra technique with row reduction from section 5.3.2.2
was introduced and implemented in the tool IronMask in Belaïd et al.
(2022).
Section 5.4. The optimization in the probing model by considering
larger sets from section 5.4.1.1 was first introduced in Barthe et al.
(2015) with the tool maskVerif.

The optimization in the probing model by eliminating weak
observations from section 5.4.1.2 was first introduced in Bordes and
Karpman (2021) with the tool matverif.
The exploration algorithms and optimizations in the random probing
model from section 5.4.2 were first introduced in Belaïd et al. (2020)
with the verification tool VRAPS, and later revisited in Belaïd et al.
(2022) with IronMask.
The PDT computation algorithm (i.e. Algorithm 5.5) and using Monte-
Carlo techniques for probability bounding in the context of verification
were implemented in the verification tool STRAPS in Cassiers et al.
(2021).
5.7. Solution to Exercise 5.1
Let us consider the randomized arithmetic circuit 
 with input
. and the
first set of probes 
 {a0 · b0 + (a0 · b1 + r0,1) + (a0 · b2 + r0,2) + (a0 · b3
+ r0,3) + r1,0 + r2,0 + r3,0, r1,0 + r2,0 + r3,0, r0,1 + r2,1 + r3,1, r0,2 + r1,2 + r3,2,
r0,3 + r1,3 + r2,3, r0,2 + r1,2, r0,3 + r1,3, r0,1 + r2,1 + r3,1, a0 · b0 + (a0 · b1 +
r0,1) + (a0 · b2 + r0,2) + (a0 · b3 + r0,3)}.
We can rename the expression in 
 as follows:
w1 = a0·b0 + (a0·b1 + r0,1) + (a0·b2 + r0,2) + (a0·b3 + r0,3) + r1,0 + r2,0 +
r3,0;
w2 = r1,0 + r2,0 + r3,0;
w3 = r0,1 + r2,1 + r3,1;
w4 = r0,2 + r1,2 + r3,2;
w5 = r0,3 + r1,3 + r2,3;
w6 = r0,2 + r1,2;
w7 = r0,3 + r1,3;

w8 = r0,1 + r2,1 + r3,1;
w9 = a0 · b0 + (a0 · b1 + r0,1) + (a0 · b2 + r0,2) + (a0 · b3 + r0,3).
While this is a big set of expressions, the simplification rules from section
5.3.2.1 allow us to easily conclude on the input shares necessary for a
perfect simulation of 
. Rule 1 cannot conclude immediately since all
shares of input  appear in the expressions in 
. However, by iterating on
the three verification rules, we observe that w1 = w9 + w2, w3 = w8, w4 = w6
+ r3,2, and w5 = w7 + r2,3. Then, we can check that perfectly simulation 
is equivalent to perfectly simulating 
 {0, r1,0 + r2,0 + r3,0, r0,1 + r2,1
+ r3,1, r3,2 + r2,3 + r0,2, r1,2 + r0,3 + r1,3, 0, a0 · b0 + (a0 · b1 + r0,1) + (a0 · b2
+ r0,2) + (a0 · b3 + r0,3)}. Finally, we can apply Rule 2 to mask some
expressions by random values to obtain the following equivalent set
,
where no input shares appear anymore in the expressions. Hence, no input
shares are required to simulate the set 
 perfectly and, equivalently, the
set 
.
Now let us consider the second example with the set of probes 
 {a0 ·
b0 + r0,1 + b0 · r0 + b0 · r1, a1 · b1 + r1,1 + b1 · r1 + b1 · r2, r0,1, r1,1, r0}. After
applying the three rules on 
, we end up with the equivalent set 
{a0 · b0 + b0 · r0 + b0 · r1, a1 · b1 + b1 · r1 + b1 · r2, r0,1, r1,1, r0}, where the
first two expressions involve two shares of both inputs  and . No more
simplifications can be done on 
 with additional applications of the rules,
which means that a perfect simulation of 
 potentially requires the
knowledge of the first and second shares of both inputs. Meanwhile, we can
observe that 
 can be rewritten as
,
where r0, r1 and r2 are additive to the shares of input . Since r2 appears
only once in 
, we can use it to mask the expression of (a1 + r1 + r2),
which then enables us to use r1 to mask the expression of (a0 + r0 + r1).
Finally, we can check that 
has an identical distribution as 
 and 
. In this new set 
, no shares
of input  are required to produce a perfect simulation, only b0 and b1,

shares of . Hence, this is also the case for the set 
. This example shows
us that we can add another simplification step to the previously defined
steps, where we try to factorize the expressions and check if any random
values are additive on the input shares in the different factors.
5.8. References
Barthe, G., Belaïd, S., Dupressoir, F., Fouque, P.-A., Grégoire, B., Strub, P.-
Y. (2015). Verified proofs of higher-order masking. In EUROCRYPT
2015, Oswald, E. and Fischlin, M. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Belaïd, S., Coron, J.-S., Prouff, E., Rivain, M., Taleb, A.R. (2020). Random
probing security: Verification, composition, expansion and new
constructions. In CRYPTO 2020, Micciancio, D. and Ristenpart, T. (eds).
Springer, Heidelberg.
Belaïd, S., Mercadier, D., Rivain, M., Taleb, A.R. (2022). Ironmask:
Versatile verification of masking security. In 43rd IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy, SP 2022. San Francisco. doi:
10.1109/SP46214.2022.9833600.
Bloem, R., Groß, H., Iusupov, R., Könighofer, B., Mangard, S., Winter, J.
(2018). Formal verification of masked hardware implementations in the
presence of glitches. In EUROCRYPT 2018, Nielsen, J.B. and Rijmen, V.
(eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Bordes, N. and Karpman, P. (2021). Fast verification of masking schemes in
characteristic two. In EUROCRYPT 2021, Canteaut, A. and Standaert,
F.-X. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Cassiers, G., Faust, S., Orlt, M., Standaert, F.-X. (2021). Towards tight
random probing security. In CRYPTO 2021, Malkin, T. and Peikert, C.
(eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Ishai, Y., Sahai, A., Wagner, D. (2003). Private circuits: Securing hardware
against probing attacks. In CRYPTO 2003, Boneh, D. (ed.). Springer,
Heidelberg.

Knichel, D., Sasdrich, P., Moradi, A. (2020). SILVER – Statistical
independence and leakage verification. In ASIACRYPT 2020, Moriai, S.
and Wang, H. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
OceanofPDF.com

PART 2
Cryptographic Implementations
OceanofPDF.com

6
Hardware Acceleration of Cryptographic
Algorithms
Lejla BATINA,1 Pedro Maat COSTA MASSOLINO2 and Nele
MENTENS3,4
1Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands
2PQShield, Oxford, United Kingdom
3Leiden University, Netherlands
4KU Leuven, Belgium
6.1. Introduction
In this chapter, we discuss the use of hardware platforms for the
implementation of cryptographic algorithms. While most traditional
cryptographic algorithms can be implemented in software on general-
purpose microprocessors, there are applications that require cryptographic
algorithms to be implemented in hardware. Depending on the specific
application, there are several reasons for moving to hardware. The first
reason is that hardware platforms are typically more energy efficient than
software platforms. Energy efficiency is important in applications that are
battery-powered or relying on energy-harvesting. The second reason is that
hardware implementations can typically achieve a higher performance than
software implementations. This is important for applications that require a
low latency or a high throughput. The third reason why a hardware
implementation is preferred over a software implementation is that it is
typically more difficult to tamper with hardware than with software, that is,
an adversary can more easily modify the software of a system than the
hardware.
There is also a downside to implementing cryptographic algorithms in
hardware, and this has to do with flexibility. Software can be modified after
deployment, while hardware cannot. When we look at the whole spectrum
of implementation platforms that we refer to as hardware, however, there
also exist hardware platforms that are programmable like software. The

most popular programmable hardware platform is a field-programmable
gate array (FPGA). As opposed to an application-specific integrated circuit
(ASIC), which is a fixed chip, an FPGA is a regular structure of
configurable cells with configurable routing in between the cells. In the past
decades, FPGAs have moved from mainly homogeneous systems to more
heterogeneous systems with dedicated building blocks for specific
applications, in addition to the regular configurable cells. Given that FPGAs
are produced in high volumes, it is feasible for commercial vendors to
follow the latest technology nodes. For that reason, and thanks to the
availability of application-specific dedicated building blocks, FPGAs are
very attractive implementation platforms. They combine the energy-
efficiency and the performance of hardware with the flexibility of software.
In Figure 6.1, the properties of ASICs, FPGAs and general-purpose
microprocessors are summarized.
Figure 6.1. Comparison of the implementation properties of ASICs
(application-specific integrated circuits), FPGAs (field-programmable gate
arrays) and μPs (general-purpose microprocessors)
6.2. Hardware optimization of symmetric-key
cryptography
While software implementations concentrate on optimally executing

algorithms in chunks of 8, 16, 32 or 64 bits, depending on the datapath
width of the processor, hardware implementations are capable of processing
all bits in parallel. The following operations are commonly used in
symmetric-key cryptographic algorithms: shift operations, logical
operations (XOR, AND, etc.), additions modulo 2n and substitution boxes
(with a typical input/output size between 3 and 8 bits). The most intensively
studied components, with the largest range of optimization possibilities, are
substitution boxes or S-boxes. The example we use in this section to
illustrate the hardware implementation of S-boxes is the S-box in the
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES).
6.2.1. Hardware implementation of the AES S-box
The S-box appears 16 times in each round of AES. In the key schedule, the
S-box is also used four times for the calculation of each round key. This
leads to a total of 200, 240 and 280 S-box computations in one AES
encryption, for key lengths of 128, 192 or 256 bits, respectively. As a result,
improving the efficiency of one S-box has a significant effect on the
efficiency of the overall AES encryption. The implementation approaches
of the AES S-box can be divided into three categories:
look-up table (LUT)-based implementation in logic;
LUT-based implementation in embedded memory;
composite field based implementation in logic.
In the first option, the 8-bit S-box is implemented as a LUT using logic
gates, typically in a structure with a logical depth equal to two. This
approach leads to the fastest implementation, but consumes a lot of
resources. For FPGA implementations, a more suitable solution relies on
the use of embedded memory blocks, like Block RAM (BRAM). Because a
lot of BRAM is available on the FPGA anyway, this saves area in the
configurable part of the FPGA. However, the hardware architecture has to
be redesigned in order to be able to address the BRAM and to cope with the
one-cycle delay for reading values from the RAM. Another solution, which
is more compact than the LUT approach and can also be implemented with
logical gates, takes advantage of the arithmetic structure of the S-box by

using composite field arithmetic. We elaborate on this option in the next
paragraph.
6.2.2. Composite field based implementation of the AES
S-box
The AES standard describes the S-box computation as a sequence of two
operations:
1. a multiplicative inverse in the Galois field GF(28), where the byte
consisting of all zero-bits is mapped to itself;
2. an affine transformation, represented as:
in which B = [b0, b1, b2, b3, b4, b5, b6, b7]T and C = [c0, c1, c2, c3, c4,
c5, c6, c7]T are the inputs and outputs of the affine transformation.
The irreducible polynomial m(x) = x8 + x4 + x3 + x + 1 defines the field
GF(28). An element of the field is represented by a polynomial of degree 7:
A(x) = a7x7 + a6x6 + a5x5 + a4x4 + a3x3 + a2x2 + a1x + a0. In order to
compute B(x), the inverse of A(x), the equation A(x) · B(x) ≡ 1 mod m(x)
needs to be satisfied.
Calculating an inverse in GF(28) is done through the use of composite field
arithmetic for field extensions of degree 2. 
 can be viewed as a
field extension of degree 2 over GF(24). An irreducible polynomial f(x) = x2

[6.1]
+ ax + β, with α, β ∊ GF(24), is used to generate the field 
 as
an extension of GF(24). The extension field 
 is a two-
dimensional vector space over GF(24). An element 
can be written as Δ = δ1x + δ0, with δ1, δ0 ∊ GF(24). The inversion can be
calculated as follows using operations in the subfield GF(24):
When using extensions fields for the inversion in the AES S-box, there are
two implementation options. Either the subfield operations are directly
performed in GF(24) or the equation can be applied recursively by using the
tower field 
. In any case, the transformation from GF(28) to
 or 
 needs to be done, as well as the inverse
transformation. The latter can be combined with the affine transformation
that follows the finite field inversion in the AES S-box. In order to optimize
the implementation of the AES S-box in hardware, the coefficients of the
irreducible polynomials are chosen in such a way that circuit area of the
transformation matrices and the computations in the subfields is minimized.
Other work also proposes the use of normal bases instead of only
polynomial bases to achieve the smallest reported circuit area.
6.3. Modular arithmetic for hardware
implementations
In this section, we turn our attention to implementations of the most
frequently used public-key cryptosystems such as RSA and elliptic curve
cryptography (ECC). To this end, we focus on the most critical operations
that are modular exponentiation and accordingly modular multiplication.
Modular exponentiation is executed via repeated modular multiplication,
which is the core operation of the RSA cryptosystem. It is also present in
many other cryptographic algorithms including those based on ECC and
other curve-based cryptosystems, such as hyperelliptic-curve crypto

algorithms, isogeny-based cryptosystems, etc. In particular, the main
building block in ECC-based cryptosystems is scalar multiplication. This
operation requires multiplying a point on a curve with a large scalar and this
is done via repeated group operations in the elliptic curve group. This group
consists of all points on the elliptic curve, together with the point at infinity
that serves as the “zero” in this group, and the addition operation (the group
operations, that is, point additions and doublings are implemented as
sequences of instructions in the underlying field (GF(p) or GF(2n))). Of all
finite field arithmetic operations, the most critical one is modular
multiplication where different approaches can be used.
6.3.1. Montgomery’s arithmetic
The most popular algorithm for modular multiplication is the
Montgomery’s multiplication method. The approach of Montgomery avoids
the time-consuming trial division that is the common bottleneck of other
algorithms. His method is proven to be very efficient, especially in
hardware. We give here the details for all of the Montgomery’s arithmetic.
Let N be an RSA modulus. For a word base b = 2α, the Montgomery radix
(or parameter) R is typically chosen such that R = 2r = (2α)n > N. Let x be an
odd integer represented by its radix b representation 
.
There is a one-to-one correspondence between each element 
and its representation X = xR (mod N). This representation is usually
referred to as the Montgomery representation. Addition and subtraction of
two elements in Montgomery representation is again an element in
Montgomery representation. This fact is also used for efficient
implementations of RSA and ECC over 
.
For efficient implementation of modular multiplication, the crucial
operation is modular reduction, which is computed as follows. Let N and R
be as above, so R > N and gcd (N; R) = 1 and let T be an integer such that 0
≤ T < NR. A method to compute TR−1 mod N is called the Montgomery
reduction.
To compute Montgomery’s modular multiplication (MMM), we proceed as
follows. We consider the Montgomery’s product of two elements X and Y
that are written in the Montgomery representation. The product of X and Y

is the element Z for which z = (xy) (mod N). More precisely, for X = xR
(mod N) and Y = yR (mod N), the following holds: Z = zR (mod N) = [(xy)
(mod N)]R (mod N) = (xR (mod N))(yR (mod N)) = XYR−1 (mod N). The
computation is executed as in Algorithm 6.1 due to Peter Montgomery from
1985.
Algorithm 6.1. Montgomery’s multiplication algorithm
In this original version of Montgomery’s multiplication algorithm, a
reduction was needed after each multiplication (Step 6 in Algorithm 6.1).
The input had the restriction X,Y < N and the output T was bounded by T <
2N. Hence, if T > N, N must be subtracted so that the output can be used as
the input of the next multiplication. This step then not only slows down the
algorithm, but more importantly introduces a vulnerability to side-channel
attacks. To overcome this issue, another bound was proposed. For example,
when X,Y < 2N and R > 4N, it can be shown that the result of a
Montgomery multiplication remains within the input bound 2N so XYR−1
(mod N) < 2N. In this way, the exponentiation using MMM can complete
without any conditional subtraction. As the final step, the Montgomery
multiplication function applied to T and 1 maps the final result back to the
integers domain.

Instead of executing a Montgomery multiplication, it is also possible to
perform an integer multiplication followed by a Montgomery reduction.
Montgomery reduction is shown in Algorithm 6.2.
6.3.2. Barret reduction
Another modular reduction method is Barrett reduction shown in Algorithm
6.3. This version of the algorithm is not the same as seen in Barrett original
publication, but a more generalized version. Barrett’s reduction operates
through approximation of the quotient computed in
. The approximated
quotient  requires the computation of the constant μ = (⌊b2n / N⌋)) which
only varies with the modulus N. The value of μ can be deployed as constant
in the case of ECC or lattice cryptosystems, however in the case of RSA the
value has to be computed during the key generation.
Algorithm 6.2. Montgomery’s reduction algorithm

Algorithm 6.3. Barrett’s reduction algorithm
When comparing Montgomery reduction and Barret reduction,
Montgomery is much faster when using multi-words arithmetic, even
though Barrett does not require values to be converted like Montgomery
reduction. However, when using single-word arithmetic, such as done in
post-quantum lattices schemes, Barrett’s reduction can be faster than
Montgomery reduction.
6.3.3. Implementations using residue number system
Residue number system (RNS) is a special representation of an integer by
its residues in a given base of co-prime numbers. RNS is advantageous for
parallelism in computations and thus can speed up public-key cryptographic
implementations.
In cryptographic applications of public-key cryptography, the recommended
bit length varies between 256 bits (for ECC) to 3,072 bits (for RSA). RNS-
based implementations offer the possibility to perform the required modular
operations on smaller numbers, that is, residues, so similar to the idea
behind the Chinese remainder theorem (CRT). Similarly, RNS
computations can be executed independently for each residue, boosting
performance through parallelization of the computation.

In RNS, an integer X is represented by a set of individual n moduli
 of a given RNS basis B : (m1, m2, …
mn) as long as 0 ≤ x < M where 
 the RNS dynamic range
and all mi are pair-wise relatively prime. The elements of the RNS basis
need to be co-prime in order to uniquely reconstruct X.
We remind the reader here that CRT states the following: we consider a n-
tuple of coprime numbers (m1, m2, …, mn). We note 
. If
we consider the n-tuple (x1, x2,…, xn) of integers such that xi < mi, then
there exists a unique X, such that 0 ≤ X < M and
 for 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
It is evident that RNS is based on the CRT. Each xi in an RNS basis can be
derived from X by calculating 
.
Assuming that we have two integers a and d represented in RNS as A : (a1,
a2, …an) and D : (d1, d2, …dn), we can obtain addition, subtraction and
multiplication in RNS as
, where ⊘ : (+, −,
×). Exact division by D coprime with M is equivalent to multiplying by the
inverse 〈D−1〉M. Since RNS is a non-positional representation, comparisons,
divisions and modular reductions are complex operations, which are
performed either by converting the number from RNS to binary
representation or by using base extension algorithms.
Binary reconstruction from RNS representation can be done either by using
CRT or through a mixed radix system (MRS) transformation. Using CRT,
an integer x can be written as 
,
where 
 and 
 is the multiplicative inverse of Mi modulo mi.
As the modular inverse is computationally demanding, it is typically
computed by introducing a correction factor w, where
. Using the MRS approach,
this correction factor can be avoided but RNS numbers need to be
transformed into MRS representation (so-called a weighted moduli RNS

variant) and then from this representation to binary numbers. This technique
will be explained in the next section.
For elliptic curves defined over 
, all 
 operations (addition,
subtraction, multiplication) are modular operations. The RNS modular
multiplication over 
 is a computationally difficult operation, which can
be realized through the RNS Montgomery multiplication algorithm that
avoids modular inversions, but includes base extension operations instead.
6.4. RSA implementations
In this section, we revisit the critical issues to address when implementing
the two traditional public-key cryptosystems: RSA and ECC. As explained
above, one of the most important contribution to efficient hardware
implementations was the modular multiplication according to Montgomery.
Until today, this method remains as a predominant choice in hardware
design solutions for the public-key cryptosystems. In addition, in the late
1990s after the invention of side-channel attacks and seeing the impact they
can have on cryptographic implementations, a lot of work was completed
on revisiting the existing algorithms and modifying them to become less
vulnerable to side-channel attacks. Basically, the challenge lies in dealing
with the intrinsically nonconstant time computation for modular arithmetic.
The improvements and new proposals include new bounds for the
Montgomery’s algorithms, revisiting the original versions of RNS and CRT
and other parameter- or platform-specific solutions.
At the time of writing this chapter, RSA and ECC are the still the most
commonly used public-key cryptosystems in real-world applications.
Typically, ECC is predominantly used for constrained platforms and
embedded systems such as smart cards, passports and other small gadgets,
for example, crypto wallets and secure tokens. Implementations options
vary from software running on microcontrollers or dedicated hardware such
as ASIC cores and FPGAs. Here, we focus on hardware implementations’
aspects. Below we mention some relevant contributions to both types of
hardware implementations.

6.4.1. Previous works on RSA implementations
By means of the CRT, the speed for the RSA decryption scheme can be
increased up to four times. This possibility is very attractive for practical
applications and is hence predominantly present in the RSA deployments in
the real world. However, it includes some pitfalls on security, so it has to be
carefully implemented.
There is a long history of RSA hardware implementations. The first RSA
chip design was conceptualized by the RSA inventors Rivest, Shamir and
Adleman in 1980. In contained approximately 40,000 transistors but failed
to work reliably. The challenge of implementing modular reduction
efficiently in hardware resulted several methods being proposed in the
1980s, most notable ones are due to Montgomery and Barrett.
In 1985, Kochanski proposed an RSA chip in which the modular
exponentiation operation was divided between a CMOS array and a
microprocessor. A full length modular multiplication took place in the
CMOS array by the commands from a microcontroller. The complete
modular exponentiation was performed by microcontroller. In 1986,
Rankine introduced an implementation of a 512-bit modulus exponentiator
for RSA applications. As a result, a wide range of applications including
smart cards was claimed. This device was able to execute a 512-bit
exponentiation in < 1 s.
The work of Tenca and Koç (1999) defines precisely the notion of scalable
hardware. They have introduced a pipelined Montgomery multiplier, which
has the ability to work on any given operand precision and is adjustable to
the available area and/or performance. This work was later extended to the
higher radix algorithms in another paper by Tenca et al. (2001).
6.4.2. ECC implementations over prime fields
Most of the work on hardware implementations of ECC is for binary fields
as the arithmetic in this case is easier to implement and area and power
consumption are smaller than in the case of prime fields. However, for
platforms where specialized arithmetic co-processors for finite field
arithmetic are available, there is an advantage in using prime fields. It is this
not surprising than some authors considered a single platform for both

cryptosystems, RSA and ECC over prime field, with the scalability feature
as critical.
The first documented ECC processor for prime fields was proposed by
Orlando and Paar (2001). This so-called elliptic curve processor (ECP) is
scalable in terms of area and speed and especially suited for FPGAs. The
work of Batina et al. (2004) introduced a unique hardware module, that is, a
scalable Montgomery multiplication-based module, that can be used for
both ECC and RSA with different parameters and implementation options
(e.g. with or without CRT).
Later works were mainly focusing on compactness and the challenge to get
ECC ready for constrained environments, including RFID tags and sensor
nodes. With this goal in mind and the fact that the power and energy
budgets are extremely low, the only feasible choice was to use binary fields
ECC.
6.5. Post-quantum cryptography
Hardware implementations of post-quantum cryptosystems are generally
more complex than traditional ECC and RSA implementations, because of
the different types of operations applied. When designing hardware circuits
for RSA and ECC, designers focus on implementing the basis operations
such as modular arithmetic for integers bigger than 16 bytes or modular
exponentiation for RSA or elliptic curve point addition or scalar
multiplication. However, post-quantum primitives employ a much smaller
arithmetic that can fit around one to four bytes and have a lot of unique
procedures that are used to compute the entire algorithm. For example, in
the case of the cryptosystem Kyber, the encryption procedure requires
sampling, NTT, inverse of NTT, convolution, compression, decompression,
decoding and encoding. Implementing a separate custom hardware circuit
for each operation would be costly in terms of hardware resources,
verification and maintainability, therefore most designers have opted to
some operations in hardware, while others in software. In the example of
Kyber, designers mostly focus the hardware resources on the NTT, the
inverse of the NTT and the hash function used during the sampling, while
the other operations are done in software. Therefore, post-quantum
primitives are more complex than RSA and ECC because they apply

different types of operations, which all have to be implemented. This
increase of complexity has, as a consequence, increased the number of
hardware and software co-designs in the hardware implementations
literature.
The underlying arithmetic of lattice-based cryptosystems for key
encapsulation such as Crystals-Kyber, Saber, NTRU and NTRU Prime is
based on polynomials and matrices with coefficients smaller than 16-bits.
Unlike, previous cryptosystems based on large integer but few operands,
these schemes operate with small integers and many operands. This change
from few bigger operands to many small operands pushes the optimization
to not only the base arithmetic, but also on the higher level functions. One
of the main operations that needs such optimization is a multiplication
between polynomials or a matrix vector multiplication. In the case of
Crystals-Kyber, the polynomial multiplication is done by using polynomials
in the NTT domain, then performing the convolution, and if required the
removal of the NTT domain. In the case of other schemes, like Saber or
NTRU Prime, the polynomial multiplication can be done through the
NTT+convolution+inverse NTT, but also through Karatsuba or Toom-
Cook. While the polynomial multiplications in Crystals-Kyber can also be
computed with Karatsuba or Toom-Cook, the scheme requires that some of
the messages to be in the NTT domain, therefore implementations that do
not use the convolution are slower than the ones that use it.
Code-based cryptosystems employ more than one type of underlying
arithmetic. The KEM’s Classic McEliece, BIKE and HQC employ arrays
and matrices over binary fields during the public-key operations. However,
during the private-key operations, Classic McEliece and HQC require
binary extensions field arithmetic, and BIKE still does use a binary field
plus some integer arithmetic. This difference between private and public-
key operations is because the code structure is hidden during the public-key
operations and it is assumed to be a linear block code with a binary field.
When generating or using the private keys, it will use the arithmetic of the
underlying error-correcting code, which in the case of Classic McEliece are
binary Goppa codes and HQC is Reed-Solommon codes. BIKE uses MDPC
codes, which also uses a binary field during it is private key operations, but
the underlying decoder requires some counting, which is why it requires
some basic integer arithmetic. In the case of the Classic McEliece, the

decoder for binary Goppa codes may use some complex arithmetic, since it
can be done through the use of the Fourier transform.
Multivariate quadratics signatures schemes, like Rainbow, require a binary
extensions field that is smaller or equal to 8-bits, as well as being arranged
on matrix and vector operations. Therefore, the optimization on those
schemes have been focused on fast matrix and vector operations, such as
multiplication and row reduction.
In the case of SIKE or other cryptosystem based on isogenies between
supersingular elliptic curves, the arithmetic is based on big integers, like in
those of discrete logarithm in prime-based elliptic curves, therefore several
known techniques to accelerate and implement them can be applied.
However, there are some differences that needs to be taken into account in
order to accelerate even further, such as the use of quadratic extensions
fields and integers ranging from around 400 to 800 bits.
Finally, the signature schemes based on hashes and multiparty computation
of block ciphers require the underlying primitive to be as much optimized
as possible.
6.6. Conclusion
Implementing algorithms in hardware always leads to a trade-off between
performance, energy consumption and area overhead. Each specific
application or product is constrained with respect to these nonfunctional
properties. When it comes to cryptographic hardware, the security strength
of the resulting implementation has to be taken into account additionally,
which makes the trade-off even more complex. Therefore, accelerating
cryptographic algorithms through hardware implementation is never
exclusively oriented towards a performance boost only, but should always
take into account all other constraints of the system.
6.7. Notes and further references
The AES algorithm referred to in section 6.2.1 is described in Daemen and
Rijmen (2002).

The equation, shown in section 6.2.2 to compute the multiplicative inverse
in GF(28) using operations in the subfield GF(24) is based on observations
made in Paar (1994) and Guajardo and Paar (1997).
Rudra et al. (2001) elaborate on the use of the composite field 
for the AES S-box inversion, but no hardware implementation is presented.
Wolkerstorfer et al. (2002) applied the idea to make a compact
implementation of the AES S-box.
Satoh et al. (2001) work in the tower field 
, where they
make fixed choices for the coefficients of the irreducible polynomials.
Mentens et al. (2005) explore the design space for 
 based
S-boxes in polynomial bases to reduce the circuit area. David Canright
proposes the use of normal bases and manages to reduce the circuit area
even further Canright (2005).
Section 6.3.1. More on the Montgomery’s parameter bound adjustment
can be found in the paper of Walter (2001) and Batina and Muurling
(2002). The work of Walter offers many other useful results for
Montgomery’s arithmetic in implementations.
Section 6.3.2. More information on Barret reduction can be found in
Barrett (1987), Knezevic et al. (2010) and Dhem (1998). One work
that compares Montgomery and Barret reduction algorithms is by
Bosselaers et al. (1994).
Section 6.3.3. The earliest known statement of the CRT theorem was
by the Chinese mathematician Sunzi in the third-century CE.
Binary reconstruction from RNS representation can be done with the
concept of Cox and Rower as introduced in Nozaki et al. (2001).
Some recent result that demonstrates how to benefit from the
parallelism of RNS for hardware implementations of public-key
cryptosystems can be found in the works of Bajard et al. (2001, 2004).
The RNS Montgomery multiplication algorithm that avoids modular
inversions, but requires base extension operations is described in
Bajard et al. (1997, 2001); Fournaris et al. (2016); Fournaris (2017).

Section 6.4.1. The two most well-known methods for modular
reduction are due to Montgomery and Barrett Großschädl (2000) and
Barrett (1987). Starting from the first RSA chip design, by the RSA
inventors Rivest (1982) many other proposal follows and interested
reader is pointed to the following papers: Kochanski (1986) and
Rankine (1987).
The works on efficient implementation of a Montgomery multiplier for
PKC featuring scalability were done by Tenca and Koç (1999); Tenca
et al. (2001).
Section 6.4.2. More recent works on implementations on
programmable hardware such as FPGAs include Orlando and Paar
(2001); Güneysu and Paar (2008).
A proposal for a single scalable module performing Montgomery
arithmetic for RSA and ECC is described in Batina et al. (2004).
Section 6.5. Examples of a few hardware implementations of KEMs
and signatures cryptosystems based on lattices have been presented as
a pure hardware solution (Zhao et al. 2022; Xing and Li 2021; Land et
al. 2021; Imran et al. 2021; Marotzke 2020; Howe et al. 2018), or a
CPU with special instructions (Alkim et al. 2020; Fritzmann et al.
2020), or only with a few operations/accelerators done in hardware
(Banerjee et al. 2019; Dang et al. 2019). Code-based cryptography has
been implemented as a pure hardware solution (Wang et al. 2018; Hu
et al. 2020; Eisenbarth et al. 2009; Richter-Brockmann et al. 2022) or
as a hardware/software co-design (Ghosh et al. 2012). In the case of
signatures, cryptosystems based on multivariate quadratics have been
done mostly as a pure hardware solution (Balasubramanian et al. 2008;
Tang et al. 2011; Ferozpuri and Gaj 2018). There is also
implementation for signature cryptosystems based on hash functions
and zero-knowledge computations of block ciphers as a pure hardware
solution (Amiet et al. 2020; Kales et al. 2020), or as hardware/software
co-design (Wang et al. 2019). Finally, implementations of
cryptosystems based on isogenies of supersingular elliptic curves with
a hardware/software co-design are from Massolino et al. (2020);
Longa et al. (2021) and Roy et al. (2020), and as a pure hardware
solution from Liu et al. (2020) and Farzam et al. (2021).

6.8. References
Alkim, E., Evkan, H., Lahr, N., Niederhagen, R., Petri, R. (2020). ISA
extensions for finite field arithmetic. IACR TCHES, 2020(3), 219–242.
Amiet, D., Leuenberger, L., Curiger, A., Zbinden, P. (2020). Fpga-based
sphincs+ implementations: Mind the glitch. In 23rd Euromicro
Conference on Digital System Design, August 26–28. IEEE, Kranj. doi:
10.1109/DSD51259.2020.00046.
Bajard, J., Didier, L., Kornerup, P. (1997). An RNS Montgomery modular
multiplication algorithm. In Proceedings 13th IEEE Symp. on Comp.
Arithmetic, Asilomar.
Bajard, J., Didier, L., Kornerup, P. (2001). Modular multiplication and base
extensions in residue number systems. In Proceedings 15th IEEE
Symposium on Computer Arithmetic, ARITH-15 2001, Vail.
Bajard, J.-C., Imbert, L., Liardet, P.-Y., Teglia, Y. (2004). Leak resistant
arithmetic. In CHES 2004, Joye, M. and Quisquater, J.-J. (eds). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
Balasubramanian, S., Bogdanov, A., Rupp, A., Ding, J., Carter, H.W.
(2008). Fast multivariate signature generation in hardware: The case of
rainbow. In 16th IEEE International Symposium on Field-Programmable
Custom Computing Machines, FCCM 2008, 14–15 April, Stanford. doi:
10.1109/FCCM.2008.52.
Banerjee, U., Ukyab, T.S., Chandrakasan, A.P. (2019). Sapphire: A
configurable crypto-processor for post-quantum lattice-based protocols.
IACR TCHES, 2019(4), 17–61.
Barrett, P. (1987). Implementing the Rivest Shamir and Adleman public key
encryption algorithm on a standard digital signal processor. In
CRYPTO’86, Odlyzko, A.M. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Batina, L. and Muurling, G. (2002). Montgomery in practice: How to do it
more efficiently in hardware. In Topics in Cryptology – CT-RSA 2002,
The Cryptographer’s Track at the RSA Conference, Preneel, B. (ed.).
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/3-540-45760-7_4.

Batina, L., Bruin-Muurling, G., Örs, S.B. (2004). Flexible hardware design
for RSA and elliptic curve cryptosystems. In Topics in Cryptology – CT-
RSA 2004, The Cryptographers’ Track at the RSA Conference 2004,
Okamoto, T. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-
24660-2_20.
Bosselaers, A., Govaerts, R., Vandewalle, J. (1994). Comparison of three
modular reduction functions. In CRYPTO’93, Stinson, D.R. (ed.).
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Canright, D. (2005). A very compact s-box for AES. In International
Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems.
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Daemen, J. and Rijmen, V. (2002). The Design of Rijndael. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg.
Dang, V.B., Farahmand, F., Andrzejczak, M., Gaj, K. (2019). Implementing
and benchmarking three lattice-based post-quantum cryptography
algorithms using software/hardware codesign. In International
Conference on Field-Programmable Technology, FPT 2019, December
9–13. IEEE, Tianjin. doi: 10.1109/ICFPT47387.2019.00032.
Dhem, J.-F. (1998). Design of an efficient public-key cryptographic library
for RISC-based smart cards. PhD Thesis, UCLouvain, Leuven.
Eisenbarth, T., Güneysu, T., Heyse, S., Paar, C. (2009). MicroEliece:
McEliece for embedded devices. In CHES 2009, Clavier, C. and Gaj, K.
(eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Farzam, M.H., Sarmadi, S.B., Mosanaei-Boorani, H., Alivand, A. (2021).
Hardware architecture for supersingular isogeny Diffie-Hellman and key
encapsulation using a fast Montgomery multiplier. IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. I Regul. Pap., 68(5), 2042–2050. doi: 10.1109/TCSI.2021.3062871.
Ferozpuri, A. and Gaj, K. (2018). High-speed FPGA implementation of the
NIST round 1 rainbow signature scheme. In 2018 International
Conference on ReConFigurable Computing and FPGAs, December 3–5.
IEEE, Cancun. doi: 10.1109/RECONFIG.2018.8641734.

Fournaris, A.P. (2017). Fault and Power Analysis Attack Protection
Techniques for Standardized Public Key Cryptosystems. Springer, Cham.
Fournaris, A.P., Papachristodoulou, L., Batina, L., Sklavos, N. (2016).
Residue number system as a side channel and fault injection attack
countermeasure in elliptic curve cryptography. In 2016 International
Conference on Design and Technology of Integrated Systems in
Nanoscale Era (DTIS). IEEE, Istanbul.
Fritzmann, T., Sigl, G., Sepúlveda, J. (2020). RISQ-V: Tightly coupled
accelerators for post-quantum cryptography. IACR TCHES, 2020(4),
239–280.
Ghosh, S., Delvaux, J., Uhsadel, L., Verbauwhede, I. (2012). A speed area
optimized embedded co-processor for McEliece cryptosystem. In 23rd
IEEE International Conference on Application-Specific Systems,
Architectures and Processors, July 9–11, Delft. doi:
10.1109/ASAP.2012.16.
Großschädl, J. (2000). High-speed RSA hardware based on Barret’s
modular reduction method. In CHES 2000, Çetin Kaya, K. and Paar, C.
(eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Guajardo, J. and Paar, C. (1997). Efficient algorithms for elliptic curve
cryptosystems. In Annual International Cryptology Conference, Kaliski,
B.S. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Güneysu, T. and Paar, C. (2008). Ultra high performance ECC over NIST
primes on commercial FPGAs. In CHES 2008, Oswald, E. and Rohatgi,
P. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Howe, J., Oder, T., Krausz, M., Güneysu, T. (2018). Standard lattice-based
key encapsulation on embedded devices. IACR TCHES, 2018(3), 372–
393.
Hu, J., Baldi, M., Santini, P., Zeng, N., Ling, S., Wang, H. (2020).
Lightweight key encapsulation using LDPC codes on FPGAs. IEEE
Trans. Computers, 69(3), 327–341. doi: 10.1109/TC.2019.2948323.

Imran, M., Almeida, F., Raik, J., Basso, A., Roy, S.S., Pagliarini, S. (2021).
Design space exploration of SABER in 65 nm ASIC. In ASHES@CCS
2021: Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Attacks and Solutions in
Hardware Security, Virtual Event, Republic of Korea, Chang, C.,
Rührmair, U., Katzenbeisser, S., Mukhopadhyay, D. (eds). ACM, New
York. doi: 10.1145/3474376.3487278.
Kales, D., Ramacher, S., Rechberger, C., Walch, R., Werner, M. (2020).
Efficient FPGA implementations of LowMC and Picnic. In CT-RSA
2020, Jarecki, S. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Knezevic, M., Vercauteren, F., Verbauwhede, I. (2010). Faster interleaved
modular multiplication based on Barrett and Montgomery reduction
methods. IEEE Trans. Computers, 59(12), 1715–1721. doi:
10.1109/TC.2010.93.
Kochanski, M. (1986). Developing an RSA chip. In CRYPTO’85, Williams,
H.C. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Land, G., Sasdrich, P., Güneysu, T. (2021). A hard crystal – Implementing
dilithium on reconfigurable hardware. Report 2021/355, Cryptology
ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/355.
Liu, W., Ni, Z., Ni, J., Rafferty, C., O’Neill, M. (2020). High performance
modular multiplication for SIDH. IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des.
Integr. Circuits Syst., 39(10), 3118–3122. doi:
10.1109/TCAD.2019.2960330.
Longa, P., Wang, W., Szefer, J. (2021). The cost to break SIKE: A
comparative hardware-based analysis with AES and SHA-3. In CRYPTO
2021, Malkin, T. and Peikert, C. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Marotzke, A. (2020). A constant time full hardware implementation of
streamlined NTRU prime. In Smart Card Research and Advanced
Applications, Liardet, P. and Mentens, N. (eds). Springer, Cham. doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-68487-7_1.
Massolino, P.M.C., Longa, P., Renes, J., Batina, L. (2020). A compact and
scalable hardware/software co-design of SIKE. IACR TCHES, 2020(2),
245–271.

Mentens, N., Batina, L., Preneel, B., Verbauwhede, I. (2005). A systematic
evaluation of compact hardware implementations for the Rijndael S-
Box. In Cryptographers’ Track at the RSA Conference. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg.
Nozaki, H., Motoyama, M., Shimbo, A., Kawamura, S. (2001).
Implementation of RSA algorithm based on RNS Montgomery
multiplication. In CHES 2001, Çetin Kaya, K., Naccache, D., Paar, C.
(eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Orlando, G. and Paar, C. (2001). A scalable GF(p) elliptic curve processor
architecture for programmable hardware. In CHES 2001, Çetin Kaya, K.,
Naccache, D., Paar, C. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Paar, C. (1994). Efficient VLSI architectures for bit-parallel computation in
Galois fields. PhD Thesis, University of Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg and
Essen.
Rankine, G. (1987). THOMAS – A complete single chip RSA device
(informal contribution). In CRYPTO’86, Odlyzko, A.M. (ed.). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
Richter-Brockmann, J., Chen, M., Ghosh, S., Güneysu, T. (2022). Racing
BIKE: Improved polynomial multiplication and inversion in hardware.
IACR Trans. Cryptogr. Hardw. Embed. Syst., 2022(1), 557–588. doi:
10.46586/tches.v2022.i1.557-588.
Rivest, R.L. (1982). A short report on the RSA chip. In CRYPTO’82,
Chaum, D., Rivest, R.L., Sherman, A.T. (eds). Plenum Press, New York.
Roy, D.B., Fritzmann, T., Sigl, G. (2020). Efficient hardware/software co-
design for post-quantum crypto algorithm SIKE on ARM and RISC-V
based microcontrollers. In IEEE/ACM International Conference On
Computer Aided Design. IEEE, San Diego. doi:
10.1145/3400302.3415728.
Rudra, A., Dubey, P.K., Jutla, C.S., Kumar, V., Rao, J.R., Rohatgi, P. (2001).
Efficient Rijndael encryption implementation with composite field
arithmetic. In International Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and

Embedded Systems, Koç, Ç.K., Naccache, D., Paar, C. (eds). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
Satoh, A., Morioka, S., Takano, K., Munetoh, S. (2001). A compact
Rijndael hardware architecture with B-box optimization. In International
Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology and
Information Security, Boyd, C. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Tang, S., Yi, H., Ding, J., Chen, H., Chen, G. (2011). High-speed hardware
implementation of Rainbow signature on FPGAs. In Post-Quantum
Cryptography – 4th International Workshop, PQCrypto 2011, Yang, B.-
Y. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Tenca, A.F. and Koç, Ç. (1999). A scalable architecture for Montgomery
multiplication. In CHES’99, Çetin Kaya, K. and Paar, C. (eds). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
Tenca, A.F., Todorov, G., Koç, Ç. (2001). High-radix design of a scalable
modular multiplier. In CHES 2001, Çetin Kaya, K., Naccache, D., Paar,
C. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Walter, C.D. (2001). Sliding windows succumbs to Big Mac attack. In
CHES 2001, Çetin Kaya, K., Naccache, D., Paar, C. (eds). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
Wang, W., Szefer, J., Niederhagen, R. (2018). FPGA-based Niederreiter
cryptosystem using binary Goppa codes. In Post-Quantum Cryptography
– 9th International Conference, PQCrypto 2018, Lange, T. and
Steinwandt, R. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Wang, W., Jungk, B., Wälde, J., Deng, S., Gupta, N., Szefer, J.,
Niederhagen, R. (2019). XMSS and embedded systems. In SAC 2019,
Paterson, K.G. and Stebila, D. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Wolkerstorfer, J., Oswald, E., Lamberger, M. (2002). An ASIC
implementation of the AES SBoxes. In Cryptographers’ Track at the
RSA Conference, Preneel, B. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Xing, Y. and Li, S. (2021). A compact hardware implementation of CCA-
secure key exchange mechanism CRYSTALS-KYBER on FPGA. IACR

TCHES, 2021(2), 328–356.
Zhao, C., Zhang, N., Wang, H., Yang, B., Zhu, W., Li, Z., Zhu, M., Yin, S.,
Wei, S., Liu, L. (2022). A compact and high-performance hardware
architecture for crystals-dilithium. IACR Trans. Cryptogr. Hardw.
Embed. Syst., 2022(1), 270–295.
OceanofPDF.com

7
Constant-Time Implementations
Thomas PORNIN
NCC Group, Canada
7.1. What does constant-time mean?
7.1.1. Timing attacks
Timing attacks are a class of side-channel attacks that rely on time
measurements. They were first described by Kocher (1996), in the context
of asymmetric algorithms using modular arithmetics, and especially
modular exponentiation, on big integers (RSA, Diffie–Hellman, etc.). In
this context, an implementation would exhibit a total execution time
correlated with some part of the secret elements. The attacker would
measure the total execution time of the implementation over various known
inputs, and use the bias to infer information on the private key bits.
This first class of timing-based side-channels was later expanded to cover,
more generally, all side-channels that can be detected through timing
measurements, not only the execution time of the attacked system itself. For
instance, the layout of data in cache memory left after execution of the
implementation can be obtained by measuring the time needed for access to
various data elements, even though the attacked system has already
completed execution at this point. A particular implementation of an
algorithm is said to be constant-time if it is inherently immune to timing
attacks in that extended meaning.
The expression “constant-time” is somewhat misleading:
A constant-time implementation does not necessarily execute in a
constant amount of time. Timing attacks try to recover secret
information (in particular private keys); if variations in execution time
do not depend on secret data, or cannot be practically correlated with
secret data, then a non-constant execution time does not prevent the
implementation from being constant-time.

A contrario, a constant execution time does not guarantee an
implementation to be constant-time. Indeed, the system state left after
execution of the implementation may have secret-dependent
characteristics that can potentially be measured by the attacker through
timings. Contents of cache memory, keeping a partial trace of the
memory access pattern of the implementation, are a prime target for
such attacks.
The salient points of the definition of constant-time code are as follows:
Inherent immunity: constant-time implementation is about using code
techniques that cannot be exploited through timing attacks. The
attacker is supposed to be able to perform precise measurements with
no noise on any specific instruction. There are possible mitigations
against some timing attacks, for example, random masking, cache line
pre-filling, or adding some random delays, but their effectiveness
relies on specific assumptions on how the attack itself is implemented;
as such, these mitigations are not considered to be part of the concept
of “constant-time”.
Hardware dependence: an implementation can be said to be constant-
time only relatively to a specific model of the hardware on which the
code executes. This model is, mostly, a definite set of assumptions on
the timing behavior of individual operations, and what secret-
dependent state variations may be detected through timing
measurements.
We specifically do not address random blinding and masking, which are
common defenses against a range of side-channel attacks (see Chapter 1).
Such operations would nominally fall under the definition above, in that
any information on the masked values, leaked through timing
measurements, would be inexploitable by attackers; however, the mask
generation itself, as well as its application on the data and ulterior removal,
would still need to be constant-time in the sense developed in this chapter.
7.1.2. Applicability and importance
It is reasonable to ask why, among all possible side-channels, timing-related
attacks deserve a special treatment, so that most general-purpose

cryptographic libraries focus on having constant-time implementations but
not, for instance, implementations protected against differential power
analysis. One main reason is that timing attacks can sometimes be exercised
remotely. For most side-channel attacks, the attacker must bring some
dedicated measuring apparatus into the physical vicinity of the attacked
system, for example, an oscilloscope plugged into the power lines of the
target device. However, in the case of timing attacks:
Modern communication hardware, optimized to have the lowest
possible latency, allows for precise remote measurements, especially
when trying to pinpoint slight differences between two similar
experiments. Sub-microsecond precision can be achieved from several
hundreds of miles away, over standard optic fiber networks.
Measuring timing differences only requires a precise clock, and such a
clock is a standard issue in general-purpose hardware, since all modern
CPUs now include simple cycle counters. No dedicated apparatus is
necessary; a simple shell account on a virtual machine in a cloud is
enough to begin attempting timing attacks on neighboring servers.
Thus, contrary to most side-channel attacks, timing attacks cannot be fully
mitigated by local physical actions such as shielding or secure premises. It
can be hard to assess whether some mitigations are really effective at
preventing timing attacks with unknown characteristics. Constant-time
implementations, on the other hand, nominally provide immunity to the
whole class of timing attacks.
Another reason for the focus on timing attacks is that defending against
them is possible in a generic way. Preventing side-channel attacks requires
first establishing a model of the side-channel, and that depends heavily on
the involved hardware. In the case of timing attacks, though, it is possible to
use a generic model that applies to most CPUs, from small embedded
systems to large servers. As will be detailed in section 7.2, timing-related
side-channels in current CPUs boil down to a few opcodes with a variable
execution time, and memory access patterns (the latter covers both data
accesses and conditional jumps, since a conditional jump changes the
sequence of instruction addresses that the CPU fetches during execution). It
is therefore possible to make an implementation of an algorithm that will

defeat timing attacks on at least most systems, regardless of usage context;
this is what constant-time implementations are about. In constrast,
differential power analysis cannot really be prevented abstractly for all
possible hardware on which a given implementation may run.
7.1.3. Example: rejection sampling
To illustrate the subtleties of the definition of “constant-time”, consider the
following piece of C code that generates a random integer d modulo, with
another integer q provided as parameter; this integer could be, for instance,
a private key for ECDSA when working with a curve of order q:
In this code, integers are represented as byte sequences in little-endian
order. The outer for loop implements rejection sampling in order to generate
an integer uniformly distributed modulo q: random bytes are obtained from
a PRNG and then interpreted as an integer value; if the value is lower than
the modulus, then it is returned, otherwise the process loops. The inner for
loop is the comparison between the candidate d and the modulus,
proceeding byte by byte in most-to-least significant order.
In this code there are two conditional jumps that operate on secret data (the
elements of d[]). A conditional jump leaks information through timing since
the overall execution time, as well as the memory access pattern, will
depend on whether the jump was taken or not.

Thus, conditional jumps on secret data usually mean that the
implementation is not constant-time. However, in this example, only the
second test (d[i] < q[i]) breaks constant-time discipline; the first one does
not.
The first test can still be considered constant-time because the test will
match only for candidates who are rejected, and a rejected candidate is not,
in fact, secret. For the actually returned secret key, this test was necessarily
never matched (otherwise the key would not have been returned), and thus
the matching or non-matching of that test yields no information whatsoever
on the returned key.
The second test, however, is not constant-time. Indeed, it will return the
value d as soon as it can be decided that the candidate d is in the proper
range, without inspecting the lower order bytes. Thus, the number of
iterations of the inner loop, and therefore the execution time and the
memory access pattern will depend on how many of the top bytes of the
returned d are equal to the top bytes of q.
A constant-time version of this function is as follows:
In this version, the comparison is performed by computing the subtraction d
− q. The computation proceeds from low to high order bytes, and the
variable cc contains the running borrow. The result of the subtraction is not
kept, but the borrow will be non-zero if and only if the result is negative,

that is, d < q. It is easily seen that the inner loop will always have exactly
len iterations, and will access bytes in an order that does not depend on the
value of d. A final conditional jump remains: this is the test corresponding
to rejection sampling, and, as explained above, it does not break constant-
time discipline.
A few points are noteworthy in that example:
A conditional jump on secret data does not necessarily imply that the
implementation is not constant-time. Analysis may show that the
information leak cannot be exploited, as shown above in the case of
rejection sampling. Interestingly, when a value d is rejected, that value
was secret and sensitive at the time the test was performed; but the fact
that the test matched turned that d into a non-secret.
The example above used bytes (uint8_t type in C), but a similar
implementation could be made with larger words. If 32-bit words were
used, then the potential information leak would be rarer, to the extent
that it may evade detection by generic testing processes. This
highlights the importance of analyzing the source code itself, not just
relying on sample measurements, when writing constant-time code. A
contrario, if using large enough words (e.g. 64 bits), then the potential
information leak could be argued to become rare enough that it cannot
be exploited in practice, thereby restoring security, even with a
nominally non-constant-time implementation. Note that event rarity
can be, in general, hard to guarantee in cryptographic implementations,
when working over attacker-provided data: the attacker may choose
data that specifically exercises edge cases; however, in this example,
the randombytes() function is not attacker-controlled.
Implicit in this analysis is that the source PRNG (the randombytes()
function) is cryptographically secure. When a candidate is rejected,
this inherently leaks the information that the PRNG produced a value
that was not lower than q. If the PRNG is assumed to be secure, then
this yields no usable information on subsequent outputs from the same
PRNG. If the source PRNG were not that secure (e.g. if the PRNG was
seeded on a low entropy password, susceptible to dictionary attacks),
then the analysis would not hold, and rejection sampling would not be
constant-time.

A case can be made that any system using cryptography necessarily
includes a formally non-constant-time processing step. For instance, when
verifying a MAC on some data, the outcome (accept or reject), and thus the
subsequent behavior of the application, depends on the value of the secret
key. More generally, we can classify every data element within a running
implementation as “secret” or “non-secret”, such that any operation that
involves some secret input produces a secret output, potentially subject to
side-channel leakage. However, there will be a few “exit points” in which
secret data are converted into non-secret, because the properties of the
involved cryptographic algorithms provide us such guarantees: when
encrypting secret data, the ciphertext is non-secret, because that is the
whole point of encrypting the data! A practical approach to constant-time
implementations is thus to “follow the secrets” throughout the execution,
taking care to only apply operations that do not leak usable information
through timing-based side-channels, until the secret reaches one of these
exit points for which cryptographic analysis tells us that the conversion
from secret to non-secret classification is safe.
7.2. Low-level issues
7.2.1. CPU execution pipeline
There is a large variety of hardware architectures, covering the whole range
from the smallest embedded CPUs (e.g. in smartcards) to large multicore
processors running in powerful servers. However, some CPU characteristics
are now almost universal due to the wide adoption of RISC architectural
design elements, in particular; we review here a few key concepts that are
needed to properly assess whether a given implementation is constant-time
(see Chapter 2 of Volume 1 for a more detailed discussion of program
execution in modern CPUs).
Modern CPUs tend to execute instructions in the following way:
1. Instructions are decoded from their in-memory representation. For
large CPUs with CISC-like instructions (especially x86), this decoding
is a full translation layer that breaks down instructions into a stream of
simpler, RISC-like instructions (called micro-operations or μops in
Intel terminology); smaller CPUs (e.g. embedded ARM CPUs) will

usually stick to a RISC-like instruction set, making this translation
layer mostly trivial.
2. The μops are processed over a pipeline which handles dependencies
between instructions, and decides when an instruction processing can
start. Each instruction may execute over several cycles (sometimes
more than a dozen), but most hardware units allow a new instruction to
start before the previous one has finished executing. Such overlapping
execution between two instructions is feasible as long as the second
instruction does not need the output of the first as an input operand. If
the pipeline detects such a dependency, then a pipeline stall may occur.
3. To help with breaking false dependencies, registers may be renamed.
The programming model may offer a number of named registers to
hold data (e.g. eax on x86 CPUs), but these get translated into internal
registers at execution time, with dynamic allocation. For instance, if an
instruction reads register eax, then a later instruction writes into the
same eax, the two instructions do not depend on each other, and the
second instruction may start executing before the first has completed,
even though they apparently work over the same resource (the register
eax). The register renaming unit will allocate two separate internal
registers in that case.
4. Large CPUs may feature out-of-order execution: if two instructions do
not depend on each other, then the second one may be executed before
the first one; if the first instruction is waiting for some input, while the
second is already ready to start. The range over which the CPU may
pick candidates for out-of-order execution is the pipeline depth and
exceeds 100 instructions in modern CPUs.
5. Execution can be speculative: some instructions may be executed out-
of-order under some heuristic assumption; the instruction output will
be committed when these assumptions can be verified, or discarded if
the assumptions turn out not to be fulfilled. These assumptions can be
of many types, but typically include branch prediction (see section
7.2.4) and memory independence (a read from RAM at a dynamically
computed address is often assumed not to be at the same address as a
write to RAM that occurred in the few previous instructions).

6. Exceptional conditions may interrupt the pipeline execution. The
pipeline may stall while the CPU switches to an internal routine made
of μops that handle a special case; this is called microcode. Microcode
is used for all “complex” operations (e.g. related to change of privilege
level or hypervisor management), but may also be triggered by some
instructions with rare edge cases (typically floating-point operations).
7. Memory accesses are performed both for instruction fetching, and for
data reading and writing. Complex hierarchies of caches are used to
heuristically reduce access latency.
The exact details vary a lot between CPU architectures but also CPU
models. Roughly speaking, deep pipelines and out-of-order speculative
execution are found mostly on the larger processors, but basic pipelined
execution is used even in the smallest embedded CPUs. Pipeline depth and
management are rarely fully documented, and may differ between any two
versions of the same CPU core. For the purpose of writing constant-time
implementations of cryptographic algorithms, the main points to remember
are as follows:
When exactly instructions will execute cannot be truly predicted by the
developer. This is handled by the CPU using scheduling techniques
that are hidden from the programmer’s model, poorly documented, and
subject to change.
Instruction scheduling works by maintaining data dependencies, but
does not (normally) depend on data contents. When an instruction
executes, and possible pipeline stalls, depend on, for instance, which
register is used or which memory slot is accessed, but not on the
contents of the said register or memory slot.
Exceptional cases that interrupt processing may depend on the values
which are processed, and pipeline flushing may have a relatively high
cost (several dozens of cycles) that could be leveraged for a timing
attack.
The impossibility to reliably predict execution scheduling implies that many
cheap mitigations for timing attacks lose effectiveness on newer CPU
designs. For instance, following the first publications of cache attacks, some

table-based AES implementations tried to make “safe” accesses to tables (at
secret-dependent addresses) by adding a few extra reads, so that all cache
lines corresponding to the table were touched; however, in newer CPU
designs, these extra accesses tend to be executed much earlier than the
actual secret accesses, because the latter must wait for the secret index to be
computed, while the extra accesses used indexes that could be computed
dozens of cycles in advance by the CPU.
In practice, instructions that may lead to timing-based side-channels fall
into three categories, which we will now detail: instructions with a variable
execution time, memory accesses at secret addresses, and conditional and
indirect jumps.
7.2.2. Variable time instructions
In modern CPUs, instructions tend to be implemented with a fixed non-
iterative circuit, since this is what most benefits performance: in a fixed
loop-less circuit, one execution can be started every cycle, even if the
computation requires several cycles to complete. Moreover, handling
potential early availability of results, for circuits that can do so, consumes
some extra silicon resources, and is therefore done only for instructions for
which an actual performance benefit can be extracted in that way. Thus, in
practice, only a few purely computational instructions (without memory
accesses) may exhibit a variable execution time.
7.2.2.1. Integer division
Integer division opcodes typically exhibit a high execution latency,
moreover variable depending on inputs. For instance, an ARM Cortex M4
CPU has signed and unsigned 32-bit division opcodes (idiv and udiv) that
complete in 2–12 cycles. The exact conditions for early termination are
rarely documented (e.g. the M4 technical reference manual only says that
the division operation terminates “when the divide calculation completes”).
Execution time is typically roughly proportional to the difference in sizes of
the dividend and divisor, with possible shortcuts when the divisor is a
power of two, but no general rule can be reliably inferred.
Some CPUs lack a division opcode (especially the small embedded CPUs,
such as the ARM Cortex M0+), in which case any integer division will be

implemented by an ad hoc routine provided with the compiler for the
programming language used. Whether this routine is constant-time depends
on that compiler (it rarely is in practice).
7.2.2.2. Integer multiplication
In recent CPU designs, integer multiplication is generally implemented with
an optimized circuit that has constant-time behavior. However, older CPUs,
and CPUs for small embedded systems, may still have multiplication
opcodes with a varying execution time. The most frequently encountered
CPUs of that category include the following:
The PowerPC cores of the 6xx, 7xx (G3) and 74xx (G4) lines
implement early returns in some cases, mostly when one operand is
short (with signed or unsigned interpretation). These cores have been
reused in many embedded CPUs, under various names (e.g. the
radiation-shielded RAD750, popular in aerospace systems, uses a G3
core).
The ARM Cortex M3, which follows the ARMv7m architecture, has a
constant-time 32 × 32 → 32 multiplication opcode, but also signed and
unsigned 32 × 32 → 64 multiplication opcodes which are not constant-
time, taking between three and five cycles. There are variants of the
M3 core meant for security applications (e.g. the SC300), which can
optionally be synthesized with a constant-time multiplier, for a lower
average performance (since the multiplier always has the highest
possible cost) but no timing-based side-channel on multiplications.
The ARM Cortex M0+, a very low-power core, has a constant-time
32×32 → 32 opcode, but no 32 × 32 → 64 opcode at all. The latter is
thus implemented with a compiler-provided routine, which may or
may not be constant-time.
Varying-time integer multiplications are the most vexing issue for constant-
time implementations, because multiplications are extensively used in most
asymmetric cryptographic algorithms, and mitigations to obtain constant-
time behavior are very expensive. Most nominally “constant-time”
implementations include a documented caveat that the execution platform is
assumed to provide constant-time multiplications.

7.2.2.3. Shift and rotation
Logical and arithmetic shifts, and bit rotation opcodes, have in some CPUs
a variable execution time. A constant-time optimized shift circuit is known
as a barrel shifter, which is efficient but relatively expensive in terms of
silicon area and gates (the barrel shifter is, more or less, a selection tree for
each output bit). Some old designs forgo that cost and use an iterated
algorithm for these operations, leading to an execution time that depends on
the shift count. Note that the instructions are still constant-time with regard
to the value which is shifted or rotated; impacted algorithms are those that
use secret values as shift counts. Such algorithms are rare, but include the
symmetric block cipher RC5, and also software implementations of
floating-point operations.
In the Intel x86 line, only the early Pentium IV (Willamette and Northwood
cores) lacked a barrel shifter, while all of the others (since the 80386) had
constant-time shifts. ARM CPUs traditionally had barrel shifters.
Importantly, we are talking here only about instructions for shifting a single
register. Shifts that operate on larger values (typically when shifting a 64-bit
value on a 32-bit machine) may involve a compiler-generated routine that,
again, may not be constant-time with regard to the shift count.
7.2.2.4. Floating-point
Floating-point values use a mantissa+exponent representation. The
representation format also supports denormalized values (for values very
close to zero, at the bottom of the exponent range), infinites and not-a-
number (NaN) placeholders. Additions and subtractions involve
normalizing the two operands under a common exponent, a process which
is akin to a shift with a variable, potentially secret shift count; all operation
outputs also need to be normalized, again with a shift count that depends on
the value. While the situation varies a lot depending on the involved
hardware, a few general rules can be made:
Special values (denormalized values, infinites and NaNs) are never
constant-time. When such a value is encountered (whether as input or
as output), a pipeline stall occurs, with moderate (a dozen cycles) or
heavy cost (several hundred cycles, as is typical of Intel CPUs). In
some CPUs, the hardware is unable to handle special cases, and a CPU

exception is thrown; the handler for that exception in the operating
system is then supposed to perform the computation.
In recent, large CPUs, additions, subtractions and multiplications are
constant-time as long as only normal values are involved, both as input
and as output. Multiplication by zero may exhibit an early result,
although usually not in the case of CPUs with SIMD units (because it
is quite rare that all parallel multiplications can be optimized that way
simultaneously). Divisions are mostly constant-time, but usually have
shortcuts when the dividend is zero, the divisor is a power of two, or
the divisor is zero (in the latter case, the result is a special infinite
value). Similarly, square roots are mostly constant-time, except for
powers of four.
Slightly older CPUs with floating-point support will typically not have
constant-time behavior for any operation. This is the common case of
embedded systems.
In general, it is best not to use floating-point types and operations in
cryptographic implementations.
7.2.3. Memory and caches
Apart from inherently non-constant-time instructions, the main source of
timing-based side-channels in a software implementation is the memory
access pattern, specifically the addresses at which accesses are performed,
because that pattern influences the contents of caches, in ways that can be
detected with timing measurements, during or even after the execution of
the attacked code.
In a typical computer system, RAM is much slower than the main CPU,
especially with regard to latency: when a specific byte is requested at a
given address, the value may be available only dozens or even hundreds of
cycles afterward. To avoid severe performance degradation, CPUs
commonly contain caches that keep copies of parts of the RAM under the
heuristic assumption that most memory read accesses in a typical
application are for data which were relatively recently read or written. One
or several nested layers of caches are maintained, of increasing size and
access latency. Each layer is usually organized as follows:

The address space is split into elements called cache lines with a fixed
size (often 32 or 64 bytes).
Each given cache line may be stored in a specific set of line slots
inside the cache. The number of slots in each set is called the cache
associativity. Larger associativity increases the flexibility of the cache,
but also its hardware complexity. Associativity of innermost cache
layers in modern CPUs often lies between 2 and 8.
When a new line must be cached, one of the slots must be evicted,
which may entail writing it into the next layer (or main RAM), if that
line was modified and the modification was not yet propagated. The
policy used to choose that eviction target depends on the CPU and is
rarely documented, though innermost layers tend to use a simple least-
recently-used policy, since these layers strive for minimal access
latency and thus do not have time to implement more complex
policies.
From this description, one may assume that cache granularity is that of a
line, and the exact byte within a given line that is accessed cannot leak
through side-channels. This is unfortunately not true. In particular, modern
CPUs often run several threads concurrently on the same core, and these
threads may access the cache within the same cycle, but may incur
detectable time penalties when the concurrent accesses conflict in some
way. In particular, on Intel CPUs, accesses within the same “bank” (a 16-
byte subdivision of the cache line), even if targeting different lines, may
incur that penalty and this has been used to demonstrate a timing attack on a
cryptographic application. Thus, the actual granularity of memory accesses,
with regard to timing-based information leaks, can be lower than that of the
cache line, and, again, in ways that are not documented, and can change
without notice in subsequent variants of a given CPU. The only reliably
safe way to organize constant-time code is to ensure that the memory access
pattern is truly independent of secret data.
Cache-related leaks are only about the address of each access; cache
management does not normally depend in any way on the values of bytes
which are read from and stored to RAM. Most constant-time
implementations are built on that assumption. It is, in practice, mostly true;
some high-end Intel CPUs have been found to optimize long sequences of

memory writes by omitting cache flushes for a write of an all-zeros line
over a line which was already all-zeros. This specific instance was reported
as a potential security risk, and the optimization was disabled in a CPU
firmware update; however, this example illustrates that security is at odds
with some ongoing work on improving performance in CPUs, and other
similar features may show up in later CPUs. Constant-time implementations
should be understood as a best effort mitigation that protects against timing
attacks under a given model of the hardware behavior. If that model is
inaccurate in a given CPU, then protection against timing-based side-
channels requires extra measures akin to those used against power analysis
attacks, following a deeper analysis which is specific to the hardware model
involved.
The caches on main RAM are not the only CPU feature that can exhibit
cache-like characteristics and be a source of timing-based side-channels.
Other relevant features in most modern CPUs include at least the following:
The translation look-aside buffer is a dedicated cache structure for the
mapping of memory pages from the virtual to the physical address
space.
The write buffer transiently contains very recently written data
elements that have not yet been sent to the innermost cache, but may
still be used to execute read accesses.
Jump prediction uses its own cache that records the previous target or
branch of some jump opcodes (see section 7.2.4).
In all these features, the independence of cache behavior from memory
contents is maintained, thus not requiring any extra mitigation.
The layered cache hierarchy outlined above is found in “large systems” like
smartphones, laptops or servers. Small embedded systems, using
microcontrollers that integrate a CPU core, RAM and ROM/Flash, often
have somewhat different characteristics:
RAM is usually an SRAM block that can be accessed from the CPU
with minimal latency, requiring no cache.

ROM/Flash may have higher access latency, with occasional extra
delays for some addresses (e.g. at the start of a Flash block). The
microcontroller may have an extra cache between the CPU and ROM;
that cache may or may not have separate structures for instruction
fetching and for data.
Such embedded systems often support direct access from peripherals
to RAM. An interconnection matrix arbitrates between concurrent
accesses, and may induce extra delays upon apparent conflicts; conflict
detection may be based on parts of the target addresses.
The overall conclusion is similar to the case of large systems: any access to
RAM or ROM at secret-dependent addresses may be vulnerable to timing
attacks and should be shunned in a truly constant-time implementation. A
few existing specialized implementations of cryptographic primitives for
some embedded CPUs assume that accesses to RAM (not ROM) at secret-
dependent addresses are safe, but this is a fragile property that is hard to
ascertain in any given hardware instance. In particular, the CPU core itself
is cache-less; any cache, and the interconnection matrix, are added during
integration within a microcontroller, and thus not documented in the CPU
technical reference manual itself.
7.2.4. Jumps and jump prediction
Jump instructions direct instruction fetching to a distinct address. Some
jumps have a data-dependent behavior:
Conditional jumps are taken only if a specific, dynamically evaluated
condition is true.
Indirect jumps are always taken, but fall at an address that is
dynamically evaluated. They are mostly encountered in support of
function pointers, virtual object method invocation and return from
function calls.
If the condition for a conditional jump depends on secret data, then the
memory access pattern for instruction fetching will be modified depending
on the condition value. Similarly, if an indirect jump target address depends
on secret data, then again the memory access pattern will vary in ways

correlated with the secret data. Thus, nominally, conditional and indirect
jumps are covered by the same proscription against memory access patterns
that depend on secret information. They are still treated specially because in
the programming model, such jumps correspond to syntactic structures that
are quite unlike data accesses. Moreover, caches may be specialized for
instruction fetching, thus changing the details of potential exploits; some
CPUs cache decoded μops instead of encoded machine instructions.
Jump prediction is a mechanism by which the CPU tries to predict whether
conditional jumps will be taken, and where indirect jumps will fall, in order
to keep the pipeline fed and avoid stalls. Large CPUs often feature dynamic
jump prediction, which leverages a dedicated cache-like structure that
records past behavior of recently encountered jump opcodes. These caches
do not induce an extra vulnerability, in that jump instructions that are
subject to such caches are still the conditional and indirect jumps, but they
offer an extra avenue, beyond instruction fetches, through which timing
attacks may be performed. This is helped by the fact that a mispredicted
jump implies a pipeline flush, often leading to a substantial penalty (a dozen
or more cycles), especially on high-performance large CPUs for which
processing of any given instruction spreads over many cycles. Thus, we
cannot really hope for inner instructions caches (or even caches over
decoded μops) to mitigate timing attacks on tight loops that use conditional
or indirect jumps.
7.3. Primitive implementation techniques
Any constant-time implementation will rely on elementary constructs that
implement some primitive operations in a constant-time way. As we saw
previously, some basic arithmetic and logic operations directly map to CPU
opcodes with constant-time behavior (e.g. adding two integers); here, we
detail how some other commonly used primitives can be implemented.
7.3.1. Compiler issues and Booleans
As a rule, a developer almost never deals with raw machine instructions;
most software is written in a programming language that gets translated into
instructions in some way. We traditionally distinguish between
interpretation and compilation, but the boundary between these two

concepts is a bit fuzzy; for example, many efficient interpreters actually
generate a compact form known as threaded code, in which some chunks of
raw opcodes can be inserted, leading to a continuum between interpretation
and compilation. Here, we will use the term “compilation” exclusively.
There are many modes of compilation. Ahead-of-time (AoT) compilation is
done once, usually on the developer’s system, and outputs the translated
instructions into an executable form that is stored; this is the classic mode
associated with programming languages such as C or Rust. Just-in-time
(JiT) compilation is dynamically performed whenever the piece of software
is executed; this is how Javascript is usually processed. Some programming
languages combine both, with an initial AoT pass that produces an
intermediate format known as bytecode that will be subject to JiT
compilation when executed; this is how Java or C# software is normally
used. A developer can, nominally, inspect the output of an AoT compiler to
verify how a given piece of code was translated, and thus check whether
only constant-time instructions were used, whereas JiT compilers are not as
easily controlled, since they operate in other systems, and are subject to
change. However, the hope that pure AoT compilation allows the developer
to ascertain that the output is constant-time is an illusion; indeed, some
CPUs include an additional JiT compilation directly inside the hardware,
using the provided machine instructions as a sort of source code, which is
compiled to internal instructions which are not available to the developer,
and rarely documented. This kind of “hardware JiT” is encountered mostly
in CPUs meant for mobile applications such as smartphones: the CPU
offers an high-power execution engine, but also a distinct low-power engine
that takes over when the device is idle, with a simpler, slower, and less
energy-intensive execution model. In that case, the low-power execution
engine will usually be a simplified RISC-like system, and the hardware JiT
processes the provided machine instructions.
Since later (JiT) compilation may thus always happen, most of the effort on
the developer’s side relies on making sure that the source code will be
translated into a constant-time instruction sequence by any possible
compilation process. Looking at what an actual AoT compiler outputs is
instructive, but certainly not enough to provide any sort of guarantee. It is
thus important to understand how compilers process the source code and
infer what values may actually be present in the variables the code handles.

The main issue we are trying to avoid is related to Boolean values.
Consider, for instance, the following piece of C code:
In this example, we assume that a cryptographic analysis shows that the
Boolean values a, b and c are individually secret, but that their conjunction
is not; in other words, it is not a problem if outsiders learn that one of these
three values was false, but they must not learn which one was false. The if
clause leads to a conditional jump (indeed, the bar() function is invoked
only if all three Booleans are true) but, per our assumptions, this does not
lead to an exploitable information leak. What matters for constant-time
implementation, here, is that the logical conjunction “a & b & c” is
computed in a pure constant-time fashion. This is why we use the &
operator, and not the && operator, because the latter, in C, is defined to use
shortcut semantics (its right operand is evaluated only if the left operand is
true), while & is defined to always evaluate its two operands.
Does it actually work? Let us look at the assembly output produced by the
compiler (using Clang, version 10.0.0, with optimization level -O3 on a 64-
bit x86 system):

We see that the compiler produced three conditional jumps (“je”opcodes,
meaning “jump-if-equal”). The compiler leveraged its knowledge that the
operands are indeed Booleans, and helpfully optimized the code by noticing
that if the first Boolean (a) is false, then it is not needed to compute the
conjunction of b and c, since that would not impact the final outcome. This
applies shortcut semantics, the very thing we wanted to avoid. Still, this is
not a compiler bug: the compiler is perfectly allowed to perform that
“optimization” since it does not change the abstract outcome of the
execution. This highlights that the timing behavior of the code is not part of
the properties that a standard-compliant C compiler is supposed to maintain.
The whole difficulty of constant-time implementation lies there.
In this example, we can modify the foo() function into this:

We replaced the bool parameters with int parameters. Now, the compiler
produces a constant-time output:
When the parameters have type int, they may have many different values,
and the compiler can no longer assume that each of them will be equal to 0
or 1, even if we, as developers, will call the foo() function only with 0 or 1
parameter values. This leads the compiler to perform the two conjunctions
(the second one is combined with the test itself, in the testl opcode), and the
result is constant-time (it does not leak which one of a, b and c was false).

Take care that even in that case, the non-constant-time instruction sequence
may reappear if the compiler can notice that we indeed always call the foo()
function with values which are, in fact, Booleans. This may happen if we
make that function local (static, in C terminology), in which case it can be
called only from the same file, and the compiler will thus see all possible
calls to that function and thus use that information to work out the “best”
instruction sequence (with its own notion of “best”, which, as we see, does
not necessarily match our goals). A constant-time compilation output is
achieved here only insofar as we can successfully hide from the compiler
the fact that the apparent integer parameters are really Booleans in disguise.
This is not a comfortable position; this hiding may be defeated in later
compiler versions (or later JiT execution engines or CPUs), especially when
using link-time optimizations, in which a compiler observes a complete
program in one pass and thus gains global knowledge on how any given
function is called and what kind of parameters it may receive in practice.
A reasonable, best-effort rule for constant-time implementations is to avoid
all Boolean types. Whenever a Boolean value is needed, it should be
represented as an integer type, for example, int in the C language. This will
be enough, provided that the compiler does not notice that such values
really behave like Booleans. In practice, compilers usually apply range
analysis on integer values to infer a minimum and a maximum bound on the
value; this range analysis is especially important in languages that check
bounds on array accesses (e.g. Java or Rust, unlike C), because that analysis
can often work out that some array accesses are necessarily in-range,
allowing the bounds checking to be removed from the compiled output. A
compiler using range analysis may infer that if the range is “0 to 1”, then
the value really is a Boolean. Subsequent trouble can be avoided by using
unsigned types and a 0/-1 duality: store a Boolean in a fixed-width unsigned
integer (e.g. uint32_t in C), with the convention that an all-zeros value (0)
means false, while an all-ones value (e.g. 0xffffffff for a 32-bit integer)
means true. This rule will, in practice, avoid Boolean-related
“optimizations” by compilers; it is also convenient for implementing some
primitive operations with bitwise Boolean logic.

7.3.2. Bitwise Boolean logic
We present here some constant-time implementations of a few elementary
operations that occur in cryptographic algorithms. We use here the C
programming language, but the techniques can be applied to about any
other language.
7.3.2.1. Sign extension
In two’s complement representation, an n-bit signed integer type can hold
values in the −2n−1 to +2n−1 − 1 range; non-negative values have the same
representation as they would have in an unsigned integer type, while
negative values x use the unsigned representation of x + 2n. Thus, the most
significant bit (of rank n − 1) is the sign bit: it has value 0 for non-negative
integers (0 or positive), or value 1 for negative integers. Sign extension
corresponds to storing that value into a larger m-bit slot, with m > n. In
practice, this means duplicating the value of the sign bit (bit n − 1) into the
upper bits (n to m − 1).
When n and m correspond to native sizes of types in the used language (e.g.
n = 32 and m = 64), then the language normally offers a corresponding
construction as a “type cast” (e.g. from int32_t to int64_t in C). However,
this sign extension is not necessarily performed in constant-time by the
compiler; it depends on the abilities of the underlying hardware. If the
hardware system does not offer an adequate sign extension opcode, then the
compiler may decide to extract the source sign bit, then use a jump
conditional to its value. To avoid this situation, and to also handle cases
when n is not a natural integer type size, we need to perform the sign
extension with specific code. For instance, if we have to sign-extend a 24-
bit value to 32 bits, then it can be done as follows:
Here, the constant 0x007fffff is 223 − 1; by reversing its bits (~ operator)
then a bitwise AND (&) with x, we isolate the sign bit: the value will be

equal to 223 if x is negative, and to zero otherwise. The unary negation (-)
then sign-extends that bit properly: if x was negative, then we get
0xff800000; otherwise, we still have zero. The final bitwise OR (|) puts
these extended bits back into the output.
7.3.2.2. Multiplexers
A multiplexer chooses between two values x and y, using a third one (c) as a
control: if the control is true, then the result is x, otherwise it is y. In
languages such as C, this corresponds to the ternary choice operator (c ? x :
y). Many CPUs offer a “conditional move” instruction that allows easy and
efficient constant-time implementation; however, some CPUs do not have
that instruction (in the Intel x86 line, the cmov instruction was added in the
Pentium Pro, previous CPUs did not have it) and use of the ternary choice
operator may lead to a conditional jump. CPU vendors also rarely guarantee
that a conditional move is constant-time and will never be, for instance,
subject to speculated execution. Moreover, as explained above, we would
prefer never to have to use expressions that the compiler will interpret as
Booleans.
A constant-time choice between two integer values can be implemented
with a few bitwise operators:
If c is zero, then the AND will yield zero, and the output of the outer XOR
will be the value of y.If c is all-ones, then the expression will compute y ^
(x ^ y), and the two y values will cancel each other out, yielding the
expected output x. We note here the convenience of representing the
Boolean true with -1 instead of 1.
This multiplexer is used as a building component in many other primitives,
and we will encounter it again.
7.3.2.3. Comparisons
An integer value can be compared with zero with the following:

This relies on the following fact: if x is zero, then -x will also be zero.
Otherwise, at least one of x and -x will have its sign bit equal to 1 (the sign
bit may be 1 in both if the value x is exactly 231). The bitwise OR output
will thus have its high bit set to 1 if and only if x is non-zero. The right shift
yields the result as a 0 or 1 value; the final negation transforms that into a 0
or -1 value, following the convention we previously set for representing
Booleans. From is_nonzero(), which returns 0 for a zero input, and -1 for all
other values, we can define is_zero() (to get -1 for a zero) with a simple
macro that applies the bitwise negation operation (~).
The right-shift and negation can be combined into a single arithmetic shift,
but, in C, this requires using signed integer types, which is somewhat
uncomfortable:
The trouble here is inherent to the C language: as per the C standard, a
conversion from an unsigned type to a signed type triggers an
“implementation-defined” behavior if the source unsigned value does not fit
in the formal range of the destination signed type. This is not exactly an
“undefined behavior” (in which basically anything goes), but the standard
still allows the compiler to produce an arbitrary result, or to raise a signal,
the latter often implying an application crash. As with all implementation-

defined behaviors, the C compiler is supposed to explicitly document how it
handles such cases; not all compilers have complete and up-to-date
documentation. To avoid relying on this implementation-defined behavior,
we use a pointer (&y), cast the pointer and then dereference it; this should
yield the expected result in all cases, thanks to the guarantees of the C
standard for exact-width integer types such as int32_t (this would not
reliably work to cast between non-exact-width type such as int or unsigned
long, though). The C compiler will still note that the construction is a value
cast and will not actually write the value to RAM, get the address, and
follow the pointer, so the output will be efficient. Meanwhile, the right-shift
is then performed on a signed integer, and it will perform the needed sign
extension. Formally, the C standard states that right-shifting a signed
negative value also yields an implementation-defined result; contrary to the
case of a type conversion, compilers are not allowed to raise a signal in that
situation, and in practice all C compilers use an arithmetic shift.
This description shows that the C language in particular has a complicated
relationship with signed integers; computations with unsigned types are
much more preferable, since they allow for simpler and more robust
implementations that do not rely on non-portable assumptions. Most other
languages (e.g. Go, C# or Rust) have more precisely defined semantics and
avoid such issues. Here, we will stick to C for examples, but use only
unsigned integer types.
We can extend the is_zero() function into a generic equality comparison by
noticing that two values are equal if and only if their bitwise XOR is zero:
For ordering comparisons, we can use the following:
This function relies on the following:

If x and y are both lower than 231, then y − x (i.e. the variable z) will
have its highest bit set to 1 if and only if x > y.
Otherwise, if either x or y is at least 231 (but not both), then the result is
the highest bit of x.
Otherwise, if both x and y are at least 231, then the comparison
between x and y should yield the same result as the comparison
between x − 231 and y − 231, and y − x = (y − 231) − (x − 231), which
brings us back to the first case.
Therefore, we need to keep the high bit of z if x and y have the same high
bit value (i.e. the highest bit of x ^ y is 0), or the high bit of x otherwise.
The expression is really a multiplexer between x and z, using the value of x
^ y as control. Finally, the right shift and negation extract and sign-extend
the high bit to yield the result (as with is_nonzero(), an arithmetic right shift
could be used for the sign extension, which may be slightly faster in some
cases).
Using a “greater than” comparison, we can easily implement the “greater or
equal”, “lower than” and “lower or equal”:
The comparison above is for unsigned integers. Sometimes, we need a
signed comparison that uses the highest bit as a sign bit, even if the values
are held inside variables with unsigned integer types. A signed 32-bit
comparison can be implemented as follows:
This is almost the same code as previously, except that y was used instead
of x in the rightmost XOR: all the analysis on the high bits remains valid,

except that if x and y have different values in their top bits, then the result
should be the top bit of y.
7.3.2.4. Bit length
The bit length of an integer is the minimal size of its binary representation;
in other words, it is the number of bits that remain after you have removed
all leading zeros (“leading” in the big-endian convention, where most
significant bits are written first). Extracting the bit length without leaking
information on how many leading bits were indeed zero is needed in some
operations, fo example, in some implementations of the extended binary
GCD to compute modular inverses. The dual of the bit length is the count of
leading zeros (if working with n-bit values, and the bit length of a value is
k, then its number of leading zeros is n − k, and vice versa).
Some CPU architectures offer an opcode to count leading zeros (lzcnt in
recent enough x86 CPUs, clz on ARMv7-M CPUs such as the ARM Cortex
M4), but many others do not. A portable, constant-time bit length
measurement function is as follows:

In this function, m accumulates the count of bits. The first group of three
expressions does the following: if x fits on 16 bits, then c has value 1 and
we substract 16 from the current bit count (m); otherwise, c has value 0, m
is unchanged, and x is replaced with its value right-shifted by 16 bits. In
other words, if x did not fit on 16 bits, then its bit length should be 16 plus
the bit length of its high half. In all cases, x necessarily fits on 16 bits after
executing these three expressions. The next nine lines of code apply the

same process three other times to reduce the size of x to 8, 4 and then 2 bits.
Finally, when we reach the return clause, the value of x is either 0, 1, 2 or 3
(it is a value of at most two bits in length), and the length of the original
value is the sum of the value m (which is in the 0–30 range), and the length
of the current value of x. Since 0, 1, 2 and 3 have bit length 0, 1, 2 and 2,
respectively, we just have to add x to m, and make a small correction in
case x is equal to 3 (that is the “x & (x >> 1)”expression).
This function can be extended to larger register sizes at moderate cost;
indeed, it can process an n-bit register with O(log n) expressions. However,
this low complexity can be maintained only as long as operations on
registers, such as a shift or a subtraction, have unit cost. A constant-time bit
length function on a big integer, represented as a potentially large array of
limbs in some basis, will necessarily involve a linear search for the highest
non-zero limb, with a cost proportional to the number of limbs.
7.3.2.5. Arrays
Array accesses are a prime target for cache attacks, in case the index of the
accessed slot is secret. Traditional AES implementations, for instance, are
typically used for the S-box (combined with some subsequent linear
transforms), a lookup table with 256 entries of 32 bits. Another situation
with accesses at secret addresses is window optimizations for modular
exponentiation with a secret exponent, as part of RSA (or, similarly, for
point multiplication in an elliptic curve). Such accesses leak information
about the address through the effect on caches, which can be measured
during or after execution of the cryptographic algorithm through timing of
accesses.
It is possible to perform a constant-time array access, albeit with a much
higher cost than the non-constant-time access. For instance, reading the
byte of index k in an array of size n can be done as follows (using the
equals() function defined earlier):

Here, all bytes are read. The exact order in which bytes are accessed
depends on the vagaries of the CPU pipeline and current cache state, but,
crucially, it will not depend on the value of the secret index k. For a write
access, the implementation would be:
using the previously defined multiplexer function choose(). Note that, in
that case, all bytes of the array are both read and written back. Notably, if
the array was not explicitly initialized, then its previous contents would be
undefined. Accessing nominally undefined byte values can lead to various
issues in the C language, at the very least, some warnings from static
analysis tools, even though the access is formally safe when the array
elements use one of the exact-width types (the values may be undefined, but
they are not “trap representations”). This is, again, an issue specific to C
and does not impact other languages with more precise defined semantics,
where arrays are typically initialized to zero.
Another common array-related task is an equality check: the contents of
two arrays should be compared for equality. A typical case is verifying a
password hash, or a MAC value. Common comparison functions, such as
memcmp() in C, look at the values to compare in increasing addresses, and
stop at the first divergence; while this is conceptually faster than always
looking at all source bytes, this is also non-constant-time, and an attacker
leveraging a timing-based side-channel may mount a byte-by-byte guessing
attack, each time retaining the one byte value that makes the comparison

access further bytes. The attack can be difficult to exploit in practice if the
comparison function accesses source elements by large chunks of 32 or 64
bits at a time; conversely, it is hard to ascertain that the given usage context
makes exploitation impossible. It is therefore recommended to stick to a
pure constant-time implementation, such as this one:
If the source arrays indeed have equal contents, then all XOR outputs are
zero, and the final value of r is zero; otherwise, at least one of the XOR
outputs is non-zero, and since these values are combined with a bitwise OR,
the final r will be non-zero. A few points here are noteworthy:
This function is expressed for bytes (uint8_t), but can be easily
extended to any other type as long as constant-time XOR and OR are
available.
Since we do not need to perform constant-time operations on the
indexes, we can use the natural C type of indexes, which is size_t. In
read_byte(), we had to use the uint32_t type for indexes since we had
to perform constant-time comparisons between index values.
The final comparison of r with zero uses our is_zero() function, in case
the final outcome is secret. In many cases, the index of first divergence
between inputs is secret, but the final equality verdict is not (e.g. when
comparing MAC values, a failed MAC verification usually leads to
observable consequences such as dropping a connection); in such
cases, this is_zero() call can be replaced with a simple r == 0, which is
(potentially) not constant-time since it outputs a Boolean. This
situation is an “exit point” in the sense explained in section 7.1.3.

This constant-time implementation concentrates the equality result
into a single word value (here, the r variable) and a single comparison.
It can be argued that such concentration increases the vulnerability to
fault attacks by providing a single point of failure (see Chapters 9 to 12
of Volume 1). It must be remembered that while constant-time
implementations are, in general, necessary to avoid secret information
leakage, they are not sufficient to ensure protection against all kinds of
side-channel attacks.
Another array operation which is sometimes encountered is array rotation:
for an array of n elements, and a rotation count k such that 0 ≤ k < n, we
want to store at each index i the value which is previously at index i + k
mod n. If k is not secret then this can be done with a few block copies, but if
k is secret this is a more complicated task. A simple implementation would
simply use read_byte() repeatedly to extract the correct element i + k mod n
for all destination indexes i; however, each read_byte() has cost O(n) (it
must read and process the whole source array) and the overall rotation cost
would be in O(n2), which can be prohibitive if n is large. A faster method,
implemented below, has cost O(n log n):

This function performs the rotation by k slots as the combination of
elementary rotations by 2j slots; the value rc contains 2j for each iteration of
the outer loop, and the inner loop performs that rotation, conditionally on
the jth bit of k (stored in c with our 0/−1 convention). It can easily be seen
that none of the memory accesses depend on the secret value: the k
parameter is used only to compute c, which is itself used only for the
choose() call. In this implementation, an extra temporary array (tmp),
disjoint from the array a, is used; it is possible to make a different
implementation that does not need such a temporary array, but it would
require accessing the array a in steps of rc slots, with an extra loop in case
rc is not relatively prime to n.
Array rotation appears in constant-time implementations of CBC+HMAC
encryption of records in the SSL/TLS protocols (TLS-1.3 fortunately
removed support for this particular mode of encryption). The MAC-then-
encrypt construction was used: CBC encryption is applied on the
concatenation of the plaintext, a MAC value computed over the plaintext,
some padding bytes and a single byte that contains the length of the
padding:
An attack may try to leverage a padding oracle attack, submitting
maliciously crafted ciphertext and trying to obtain the corresponding
padding length. To prevent this attack, all operations between CBC
decryption and final MAC verification must happen in constant-time,
hiding the padding length. One of these operations is the extraction of the
MAC value; this can be done with the following code chunk:

This code expects that the minimum and maximum possible lengths of the
plaintext (as can be inferred from the total size of the record, the known
length of the MAC value (mac_len), and the fact that the padding length is
necessarily between 0 and 255) are in len1 and len2, respectively; these are
public values. The actual plaintext length, which is secret, is in len_pt. The
code extracts the correct MAC value by reading bytes whose index indeed
falls within the MAC, using zero otherwise, and combining them (with
bitwise OR) into the mac[] buffer, whose size is that of the MAC output.
While a single pass is needed to get the MAC, the obtained value is, indeed,
“rotated” (the first MAC byte is at offset k in the mac[] array); this is why a
call to our rotate_array() function is needed.
7.3.2.6. Bitslicing
Bitslicing is the traditional name of a technique also known as data
orthogonalization. The principle is to “spread” the bits of a value over
many variables, and to implement the computation as a circuit of Boolean
gates. For instance, suppose that an algorithm calls for computing a XOR of
two 32-bit values. A straightforward implementation would store the values
in two CPU registers, and use a XOR opcode. In a bitslice implementation,

each bit of each value would be stored in the lowest bit of a register, thus
splitting the input values over 64 registers; the XOR would be done bit by
bit, hence requiring 32 CPU instructions; the output would also be obtained
as 32 separate registers. The core observation of data orthogonalization is
that when doing each individual XOR to combine two 1-bit values, stored
in the least significant of two registers, the CPU also performs a XOR over
all other bits of the involved registers. More generally, on a hardware
system with n-bit registers, when a given circuit of Boolean gates is
evaluated in a bitslice way on data spread over as many registers as input
bits, n parallel evaluations of the circuit are performed simultaneously for
the same price, for all bit ranks from 0 to n − 1.
Bitslicing has several performance-related benefits:
The CPU’s abilities at computing Boolean bitwise operations are
maximized, especially when registers are larger than the natural data
value width in the implemented algorithm. In the example above, the
32 XOR operations on registers collectively compute 32n elementary
XOR gates; in large CPUs, registers of 256 or even 512 bits are
available, making the bitslice computation up to 16 times more
efficient than the straightforward code that would only use 32 bits per
register and discard the rest.
Any bit permutation, which may involve considerable shifting and
masking when done in a straightforward implementation, becomes in
bitslice mode a mere problem of using the right register for the next
post-permutation gate. This is a data routing issue solved at compile-
time, with no runtime cost.
Historically, bitslicing was first applied in cryptography for attack purposes
in order to break password hashes that used the traditional DES-derived
Unix crypt() function. DES was designed to be amenable to efficient low-
area hardware circuits, and thus most suited to bitslice implementations,
that mimic a circuit layout; notably, DES contains several complex bit
permutations that are expensive in traditional software implementations, but
mostly free in bitslicing. Password breaking is also an extremely parallel
task, thereby easily leveraging the parallelism of bitslicing. However,
bitslicing was later applied for constructive purposes, because of its

potential performance benefits, but also because a bitsliced implementation
is inherently constant-time: the execution path and the memory access
pattern cannot depend on the processed data, since n instances of the
algorithm are executed at the same time, on n distinct sets of input values.
While immunity to timing-based side-channels is an alluring property,
bitslice implementations have their own challenges, in particular, the
following:
Parallelism: the high performance of bitslicing is achievable only if
enough instances of the algorithm can be executed in parallel. For
instance, in the context of symmetric encryption with a block cipher,
CBC encryption is not parallelizable, since the input to each block
cipher invocation requires the output of the previous block; on the
other hand, CBC decryption can benefit from parallelism.
Large state: since n instances are executed in parallel, this requires
handling the state values of these n instances. For instance, in a full
bitslice AES implementation, the running block value is 128 bits, and
each subkey is also 128 bits, thus nominally requiring 256 registers.
The CPU does not offer 256 registers, neither at the programming
level, nor even internally in the register renaming unit. Thus, some
amount of extra data movement will be needed. The developer writes
bitslice code in a language such as C with as many variables as
required for the bitslice representation; the compiler will map these
variables to available registers and add memory reads and writes to
flush data to RAM and read it back, thus managing the registers like a
cache on the state, and the CPU pipeline will try to perform these reads
and writes at opportune times. On large CPUs, with a superscalar
architecture, the extra reads and writes can usually be done with low
overhead, in parallel with the bitwise Boolean computations; on small
embedded systems, though, these extra reads incur runtime overhead
and significantly decrease performance.
Code footprint: bitslice code is often large, since each wordwise
operation is translated to many bitwise instructions. Small embedded
systems are often constrained in available space for code, and a fully
bitslice implementation can be prohibitively large. Large systems such
as smartphones or servers are usually less constrained, but a large

chunk of code representing a fully unrolled circuit may exceed the size
of the internal cache for code, which leads to performance degradation
through cache misses, as well as instruction decoding bottlenecks in
CPUs whose cache for code operates over μops.
Operation types: since bitslicing emulates a hardware circuit, it is well
suited to Boolean gates such as XOR or AND, but much less to
arithmetic operations. A bitslice addition of 32-bit words, as is
commonly used in software-oriented symmetric primitives, requires
performing carry propagation with a full-adder circuit (five gates) per
input bit, which lowers the performance benefits and also induces a
large latency, since the processing of each bit in a word then depends
on the output of the processing of the previous bit. Integer
multiplications are too expensive to envision. In practice, this limits
the use of bitslicing to algorithms that do not use such arithmetics
operations, for example, AES, SHA-3/SHAKE, or possibly
asymmetric cryptography using elliptic curves in binary fields; for
software-oriented algorithms such as the stream cipher ChaCha20, the
hash function BLAKE2, or most algebraic asymmetric cryptography
(RSA, Diffie-Hellman, elliptic curves in prime fields, etc.), bitslicing is
usually considered not to be a worthwhile implementation technique.
Look-up tables are challenging elements for bitslice implementations. A
general process for converting an n → m table (a table with an n-bit entry
and an m-bit output, i.e. 2n table elements of m bits each) into a circuit
amenable to a bitslice implementation is as follows:
1. Split the table into m equivalent n → 1 tables, each computing one bit
of output.
2. Convert an n → 1 table into a tree of multiplexers of depth n that
selects the output from 2n leaves. The leaves are the possible outputs
of the table, and each row in the tree uses one of the n table input bits.
Provided that the leaves are adjusted accordingly, each multiplexer can
be converted into a two-gate cirtuit “a XOR (b AND c)” that selects
between a and a XOR b depending on the value of the bit c.
3. Optimize the tree. In particular, every multiplexer in the lowest row of
the tree can be replaced with either a constant bit (0 or 1), the entry bit

for that row, or the opposite of that entry bit. There may also be parts
shareable between the m trees, since they operate on the same n input
bits, though with distinct leaves.
The goal of the optimization is to minimize the total number of gates in the
circuit to reduce both the CPU cost and the code footprint; if the target
architecture can execute many operations in parallel, then reducing the
circuit depth may also be important for performance. There is no known
practical process for obtaining an optimal circuit; exhaustive searching on
possible circuits is too expensive except for the smallest tables.
We will now consider the case of AES implementations exclusively, though
the techniques used may be applicable to other algorithms. AES uses 10–14
rounds (depending on key size), and each round includes some linear
operations (XOR with a subkey, ShiftRows, MixColumns) and an
application of the “AES S-box”, an 8 → 8 table on each of the 16 bytes that
constitute the running round state. This S-box has an algebraic structure: it
consists of an inversion in the finite field 
, followed by an affine
transform in the vector space 
. This structure has been leveraged to find
optimized circuits, with the help of some heuristic search algorithms for
additional cost savings. In 2009, an AES table circuit with 117 gates was
published, for the whole table (Boyar and Peralta 2009).
Since AES is a block cipher, it may be used in the reverse direction, using
the inverse table; inversion in 
 being an involution, that specific piece
of the circuit is potentially shareable between the S-box and inverse S-box
implementations, though this may prevent some of the optimizations that
lead to the lowest gate count. Another approach for the inverse S-box is to
use the forward S-box in a wrapper: if the affine transform is A and
inversion in 
 is denoted I, then the S-box is computed as S(x) = A(I(x)),
and we can compute the inverse S-box as S−1(x) = A−1(S(A−1(x))). This
yields lower performance for the inverse S-box than a dedicated circuit, but
it also minimizes code footprint if both AES directions must be
implemented, without altering the performance of the forward direction of
AES. We may note that, for instance, some encryption modes such as GCM
or EAX use only the forward direction of AES, and also that in CBC mode,
encryption is not parallel but decryption is parallel, thereby making

optimization of the encryption direction more important than that of the
decryption direction.
Since the high parallelism and large state often make fully bitsliced
implementations impractical on embedded systems, alternate strategies that
use only partial bitslicing have been employed, especially with the AES
block cipher. In AES, an 8 → 8 table is used (the “AES S-box”); in each
round, 16 instances of the S-box are evaluated in parallel on the current 16
state bytes. It is thus possible to perform the 16 instances at the same time
with a bitslice AES S-box circuit, even though they all relate to the same
AES block evaluation. If using, for instance, 32-bit registers, then this
strategy would mean that only two instances of AES are performed in
parallel, and each register contains 16 state bits for each instance. This
semi-bitslice architecture has some advantages, especially on small
microcontrollers:
The complete state of the evaluated AES instances will fit on only
eight registers, minimizing the need for extra traffic between CPU
registers and RAM, thereby promoting execution speed and reducing
code footprint and transient RAM usage.
The implementation performance can be tolerable even for non-
parallel workloads such as encryption in CBC mode. With 32-bit
registers, using a non-parallel mode means that only half of the
computing power is used, which lowers performance compared with
fully parallel tasks (e.g. decryption in CBC mode), but much less so
than the 1/32 factor that would be obtained with a fully bitsliced
implementation.
On the other hand, the fact that bits relevant to a single AES instance may
now appear on various ranks in a register implies that data movements such
as permutations of bits are no longer a mere routing problem entirely solved
at compile-time. The MixColumns and ShiftRows operations of AES now
involve extra computations, whose cost depends on the exact location of the
data bits among the registers. There are many opportunities for additional
optimizations, and this is an area of active research.

7.4. Constant-time algorithms
In the previous sections, we described implementation techniques for some
primitive operations. We now explore some classic algorithms that use these
techniques to provide constant-time functionalities.
7.4.1. Modular integers
Modular integers are used in many asymmetric algorithms based on
algebraic structures, in particular, RSA, Diffie–Hellman and elliptic curve
cryptography; modular integers are also found in most lattice-based
algorithms, though in that case the modulus is often much shorter and
values fit in a single machine register.
Initial implementations of many of these algorithms were designed before
side-channel attacks were even considered, and usually worked over a
generic “big integer” library. When aiming for constant-time
implementations, using big integers is an essentially hopeless strategy: a big
integer is represented as an array of limbs (i.e. digits in some basis, usually
2w on a machine using w-bit registers), and the length of that array depends
on the value itself: big integers grow and shrink as needed for the
computation. This variable length implies a memory access pattern that
depends on the numerical values of the integers, thus an inherently non-
constant-time construct. Efforts at coercing a big integer library into
constant-time behavior lead to, at best, fragile implementations with a
complex API. What is really needed is a library for big modular integers,
that is, integers that work modulo a given integer m, and that are aware of
the size of m; with modular integers, the array of limbs can have a fixed
size (which is the size that would be needed to store m itself) and a memory
access pattern that depends only on that size, not on the value. Note that
here we are assuming that the size of the modulus m is public, even if the
value of m itself is not.
The most commonly used technique for computations on modular integers
is the Montgomery representation. This representation works as long as the
modulus m is an odd integer (it does not require m to be prime, but it must
be odd). We suppose that values are represented as arrays of k limbs in basis
2w (this implies that m < 2kw). Let R = 2kw mod m. The Montgomery

representation of x modulo m is the value xR mod m, represented as an
integer in the 0 to m − 1 range. This representation is compatible with
additions and subtractions, since (x + y)R = xR+yR for all integers x and y.
The process to perform a modular addition in constant-time is as follows:
1. Add the two operands x and y limb by limb in the least to most
significant order. Each addition receives a carry (0 or 1) from the
previous addition, and outputs a carry. The value x + y is stored in a
temporary array t1. The last carry is retained in a local variable c.
2. Subtract m from the result of the addition. Subtraction is also
performed limb by limb, and a borrow (0 or 1) is similarly propagated.
The subtraction output is written into another temporary t2, and the
borrow is stored in b.
3. If the final borrow equals the carry retained from the initial addition
(i.e. b XOR c = 0), then the integer x + y − m is non-negative; it is also
less than m, since x and y were assumed to be less than m on entry.
Thus, in that case, the proper result is in t2. Otherwise, if the borrow is
distinct from the carry (b XOR c = 1), then x + y − m < 0, and the
correct result is in t1. The modular addition routine thus ends with a
constant-time selection process that copies into the destination array
the value of either t1 or t2, depending on the value of b XOR c.
Montgomery multiplication is the reason we use the Montgomery
representation: it is an operation which is related to modular multiplication,
but easily amenable to constant-time implementations. The Montgomery
multiplication of x and y computes xy/R mod m; thus, applying the
Montgomery multiplication on xR mod m and yR mod m (the Montgomery
representations of x and y modulo m, respectively) yields (xR)(yR)/R =
(xy)/R mod m, that is, the Montgomery representation of the product xy
modulo m. This leads to the following overall implementation strategy:
input values are converted to the Montgomery representation, all operations
are then performed in the Montgomery representation, and only the final
output (e.g. right before encoding into bytes for I/O purposes) is converted
back to the normal representation. Conversion to the Montgomery
representation is done by doing a Montgomery multiplication of the input

with the value R2 mod m, which can be precomputed if m is known in
advance, or otherwise computed once for each modulus m; conversion from
the Montgomery representation back to the normal representation similarly
uses a Montgomery multiplication with 1. Thus, all we need is an efficient
constant-time implementation of the Montgomery multiplication itself.
Montgomery multiplication works as follows:
Given inputs x and y, compute z = xy as an integer. Since x and y use k
limbs each, the product z may use as much as 2k limbs. We number
limbs zi in least to most significant order, starting at z0.
We set the n low limbs of z to zero as follows. For i = 0 to k − 1:
- compute fi = −zi/m0 mod 2w. This involves only register-sized
integers (w bits);
- add 2wifim to z. This leaves the limbs 0 to i − 1 of z undisturbed,
and on output zi, they are now zero as well.
We now have z = xy + fm for some integer f. Since the k low limbs of z
are now all zeros, z is a non-modular multiple of 2kw,and we can divide
it by R by simply right-shifting the whole value by k limbs.
Analysis shows that the value of z at this point is equal to xy/R mod m,
and, as an integer, lies between 0 and 2m − 1. It suffices to perform a
conditional subtraction of m to obtain the result (subtract m, and keep
the result if and only if the final borrow from the subtraction is 0).
There are various ways to organize this process in order to minimize RAM
usage or data movement, for example, by interleaving the initial
computation of xy (as integers) with the addition of the fim values and right
shifting. The division by −m0 modulo 2w can be performed with a single
integer multiplication instruction, as long as the value −1/m0 mod 2w is
precomputed; this can be done at development time if the modulus is
known a priori, but it can also be efficiently computed at runtime by
noticing that if a is an inverse of b modulo 2t, then a(2 − ab) is an inverse of

b modulo 22t (this is a subcase of Hensel’s lifting lemma). This leads to the
following routine to compute −1/m0 mod 232:
Normally, we choose k to be of minimal size, since Montgomery
multiplication has cost O(k2). However, in some situations, it can be
worthwhile to add an extra limb, and allow input operands to slightly
exceed m. Indeed, suppose that m ≤ 2(k−1)w − 2(k−2)w (i.e. m fits on k − 1
limbs, and its top limb is not 2w − 1). Then, we allow operands x and y to
slightly exceed m, as long as they also fit on k − 1 limbs (i.e. x, y ≤ 2(k−1)w −
1). Then, the value z computed after k rounds of Montgomery reduction,
right before the division (right shift) by R, is such that:
Thus, after the right shift, the result already fits on k − 1 limbs, and the
conditional subtraction of m is no longer needed. For large moduli, this trick

does not bring substantial improvements, since the cost of conditional
subtraction is much smaller than that of the multiplication; however, it can
be worthwhile for small moduli, especially in the extreme situation where
the modulus is smaller than a single register, as is typically the case for
lattice-based cryptography. For instance, if the modulus is lower than 216 on
a 32-bit system, then using R = 232 instead of R = 216 can leverage this kind
of optimization. Careful analysis or exhaustive tests are required to make
sure that the computed output is correct in all cases. Note that allowing
elements to exceed the modulus in their representation means that some
normalization will be needed at some point, for example, before encoding,
but also when performing equality comparisons.
While the Montgomery representation works for any odd modulus, some
situations allow using a modulus with a special format that allows for faster
reduction. This is, in particular, the case for many elliptic curves, where the
base field modulus is chosen a priori and is fixed. For instance, the well-
known Curve25519 has coordinates in the field of integers modulo p = 2255
− 19; in that case, a value x larger than p (e.g. the result of an integer
multiplication) can be split into a low and high halves as x = x0 + 2255x1
(with x0 < 2255) that allows an efficient partial reduction modulo p as x = x0
+ 19x1 mod p, since 2255 = 19 mod p. Fast implementations typically use
limbs slightly shorter than a machine register to allow delaying carry
propagation by accumulating some extra bits in each limb. The main
implementation difficulty is ensuring that no internal value overflows its
storage slot, that is, that sufficient carry propagation is performed as
appropriate. This is related to constant-time issues in the following sense: in
a constant-time implementation, we cannot test at runtime whether more
propagation or reduction effort is needed; thus, a thorough mathematical
analysis must be performed to guarantee that in all possible situations, all
internal values have their expected range. In particular, edge cases that
make some incorrect implementations fail are often rare, and thus not
detected with randomized procedures such as Monte Carlo tests.
7.4.2. Modular exponentiation
Modular exponentiation is the expensive core of the classic asymmetric
cryptographic algorithms RSA and Diffie–Hellman. The operation consists

of computing y = xd mod m. The exponent d is large (possible as large as m)
and secret; the input x or the output y may also be secret; in the case of
RSA, where private key operations typically use the Chinese remainder
theorem to work modulo each of the private factors, the modulus m is also
secret, even though the length of the modulus is not. We assume that
arithmetic operations modulo m are implemented in a constant-time
manner, for instance, using the Montgomery representation, as described
above.
The base algorithm is the “square-and-multiply”, which is classically
described as follows (we assume that x ≠ 0):
1. Start with y = 1.
2. For each bit di of d, in most-to-least significant order:
- compute: y ← y2 mod m;
- if di = 1, then compute: y ← xy mod m.
If the exponent has length k bits, then this process entails k squarings (we
can avoid the very first squaring, since at that point y is necessarily equal to
1) and on average k/2 multiplications, depending on how many bits of d are
equal to 1. This is, of course, not constant-time, for two reasons:
The total number of iterations depends on the length of the exponent d,
which is secret.
The multiplications by x are performed conditionally on the bits of d,
leading to a memory access pattern and a total execution time that
depend on these secret values.
Other side-channels (e.g. power analysis) may also reveal whether
individual multiplications by x are performed or not; the constant-time
techniques described below can help with defending against such non-
timing-based side-channels.
These two issues can be addressed in a simple way, although at a cost. To
hide the length of d, the trick is to pad the exponent with as many zero bits
as needed to reach a publicly known maximum size of the exponent; for

instance, if working modulo a 1024-bit prime p, then the exponent can
always fit in a 1024-bit integer (since we can use d modulo p − 1), and thus
perform exactly 1024 iterations of the loop, even though the first few of
them may be mathematically useless (value y will remain 1 until the first
non-zero bit of d is reached). The conditional execution of multiplications
must also be converted into an unconditional execution: the multiplication
is always performed, but a constant-time multiplexer is used to either keep
or discard the result, depending on the value of the bit di.
These modifications make the exponentiation constant-time, but also
substantially increase the cost, since we now perform k squarings and k
multiplications. The number of multiplications can be reduced by using a
window optimization, in which bits of the exponents are processed in
chunks of w bits. We suppose here (for simplicity) that the length of d is k
bits (possibly with padding, i.e. the top few bits of d may be zero) and is a
multiple of w. The algorithm becomes the following:
1. Compute values tj = xj mod m for all integers j from 0 to 2w − 1, and
keep them in a table of length 2w.
2. Set y = 1.
3. For i = k/w − 1 down to 0:
- compute 
 mod m with m successive squarings;
- using 
 (i.e. the value of the ith chunk
of w bits of the exponent), compute: y ← ytn mod m.
This algorithm is constant-time provided that:
the lookup process, to retrieve value tn from the table, is constant-time.
This is done similarly to the read_byte() function described previously,
but with larger elements;
the lookup and the multiplication are always done, even if n is zero for
an iteration, and the value tn is then equal to 1. We must not “optimize”
that case away.

This process does not change the cost of the squarings of y (there are still k
squarings, although we can statically avoid the first w of them). The number
of multiplications in the main loop is now k/w, which is quite lower than k,
and gets even lower with a larger window w; on the other hand, a larger w
implies more work to build the window (2w − 2 multiplications), higher
temporary storage costs (the table has size 2w elements) and a more
expensive lookup process in the table (the lookup must read all 2w elements
and select the correct one). There is thus an optimal value of w that depends
on the usage context (typical values range from 2 to 6).
There is another classic optimization known as w-NAF (non-adjacent
form). This method can be understood as a refinement over the window
optimization: the algorithm above performs one multiplication every w
squarings, but if the multiplication was for a value xn with an even value of
n, then it could have been replaced with a multiplication with xn/2
performed one squaring earlier: y2xn = (yxn/2)2. This can be leveraged into
an algorithm that performs fewer multiplications (one every w + 1 squarings
on average, instead of one every w squarings), and the table size and
construction cost are halved (we only need xn for odd integers n). However,
an inherent consequence of that algorithm is that multiplications occur at
varying times that depend on the values of the exponent bits. Therefore, a
w-NAF optimization cannot be constant-time, and it must not be used when
the exponent d is secret.
7.4.3. Modular inversion
Modular inversion consists of computing 1/x mod m, given x and m. This
operation is used in various algorithms, in particular in elliptic curve
computations, where fractional coordinate systems are often used, requiring
an inversion in the field to convert back points to affine coordinates.
When the modulus m is prime, a simple method is to use Fermat’s Little
Theorem: 1/x = xm−2 mod m; thus, a modular exponentiation is sufficient.
Moreover, if the prime modulus is also public (as is common in elliptic
curve implementations), then the exponent m − 2 is non-secret, and some
further optimizations such as w-NAF can be safely used. In the extreme
case, a carefully tuned addition chain on the exponent is employed to make

the number of extra multiplications as low as possible in a fully unrolled
implementation (the number of squarings, though, does not change).
However, this method cannot be readily used when m is not prime;
moreover, the cost of the modular exponentiation is usually cubic in the size
of the modulus (for a modulus of k bits, it entails O(k) squarings and
multiplications, which have cost O(k2) with classic implementations such as
Montgomery multiplication). It is possible to compute an inversion modulo
an odd integer m (not necessarily prime) in quadratic cost with variants of
the extended Euclidean GCD algorithm. In its initial formulation, the
extended GCD requires integer divisions and remainders, which will not be
constant-time; but the binary GCD is amenable to constant-time
implementations. One formal description of the binary GCD is as follows:
1. Set: (a, b, u, v) ← (x, m, 1, 0).
2. While a ≠ 0:
if a is even, then:
otherwise:
3. If b = 1, then return v. Otherwise, x was not invertible modulo m.
This algorithm can be implemented in constant-time in the following way:
It can be shown that if m has size k bits, then, at most, 2k − 1 iterations
are needed. Moreover, when a reaches zero, then extra iterations do
not change the value of v and are thus harmless. We can therefore
systematically run 2k − 1 iterations, removing the conditional test on a
in the “while” loop.

At each iteration, two Boolean elements can be computed: a0 is the
least significant bit of a (0 if a is even, 1 otherwise), and c is the
borrow resulting from the integer subtraction a − b. Then the three
following operations are performed, in that order:
- (a, u) and (b, v) can be exchanged conditionally on the bit a0
AND c;
- (b, v) are subtracted from (a, u) conditionally on the bit a0;
- (a, u) ← (a/2, u/2 mod m).
Provided that the conditional operations above are performed in a constant-
time way, that is, always computed but conditionally retained with
multiplexers, then each iteration is constant-time.
The final test on b should also be made in constant-time. In some
cases, it can be omitted; for instance, if the modulus is prime, then a
non-invertible x may happen only if x = 0, in which case the final
values of b and v are both zero. Depending on usage context, it may be
appropriate to return a value of zero when trying to invert zero.
The binary GCD has quadratic complexity, but works on a bit-by-bit basis
and thus tends to be somewhat slow with practical moduli sizes. Variants of
this algorithm can be optimized, though, leading to implementations which
are not only constant-time, but also even faster than Fermat’s Little
Theorem, even when working modulo a small prime with a special format
that favors fast multiplications. The core observation is that in the binary
GCD, decisions are made based both on the low bits (test on whether a is
even or odd) and on the high bits (test on whether a is lower than b), so that
each iteration needs to update the full values of a and b. However, we can
make several iterations by only looking at small portions of the values,
using an approximation of the real a and b:
If using registers of size w bits, then we can extract the top w/2 + 1 bits
of a and b (adjusted on the top non-zero bit of a or of b, whichever is
highest) and the bottom w/2 − 1 bits of both to obtain approximate
values a′ and b′ on which to run w/2 − 1 iterations. After this inner
loop, modifications to the full-size a, b, u and v are performed in a

single pass, and a potential sign adjustment is performed (Pornin
2020).
Instead of the actual values of a and b,an approximation of the
difference of their sizes can be maintained in a small integer variable.
Iterations can then proceed looking only at the low bits of a and b,
again propagating updates to the full-size a and b only once every w
iterations (when using w-bit registers). More than 2k − 1 iterations are
then needed to always reach the result, but individual iterations are
faster (Bernstein and Yang 2019).
If the modulus is even, then the binary GCD shown above cannot be used as
is. We can extract the even part of m by writing m = 2sm′ for some integer s
and an odd m′; the input value x can then be inverted modulo 2s and modulo
m′, separately, and recombined with the Chinese remainder theorem (for the
inversion modulo 2s, see the neginvert32() function above, the same
principle can be applied for any size s). From a constant-time point of view,
this will leak through side-channels, the number s of trailing zero bits of m,
which may or may not be an issue in any specific context. One such case is
when doing RSA key pair generation: the secret primes p and q are chosen
randomly, and the public exponent e is inverted modulo p − 1 and q − 1;
both p − 1 and q − 1 are even integers. A simple solution here is to choose p
and q as Blum primes, that is, equal to 3 modulo 4, which implies that (p −
1)/2 and (q − 1)/2 are both odd. This makes the CRT reassembly easy and
efficient: for a given e (odd), the inverse of e modulo 2 is 1; if the inverse of
e modulo (p − 1)/2 is d′, then the inverse of e modulo p − 1 is d′ itself if the
least significant bit of d′ is 1, or d′ + (p − 1)/2 if the least significant bit of d′
is 0.
7.4.4. Elliptic curves
Elliptic curves are groups adequate for some cryptographic operations, in
particular, key exchange (ECDH) and signatures (ECDSA, or variants of
Schnorr signatures). The group is defined as points (x, y), whose two
coordinates are elements of a finite field (usually integers modulo a given
prime) that fulfill the curve equation, which is a polynomial in x and y of
degree 3 (or 4, in some cases). Two points can be added together with a
group law that can be expressed geometrically or analytically, and an extra

formal point called the “point at infinity”, with no defined coordinates,
serves as neutral element in the group.
7.4.4.1. Formula completeness
The analytic expression of the point addition uses formulas over the source
point coordinates that depend on the exact form of curve equation; although
all curves can be expressed, with isomorphic changes of variables, into a
short Weierstraß equation (y2 = x3 + ax + b, for two constants a and b, for
finite fields of characteristic 5 or more), other equations can be used for
some curves, and lead to distinct formulas. Obtained formulas, expressed in
affine coordinates (x and y themselves), invariably involve at least one
division in the field, which is expensive. Better performance is obtained by
switching to a fractional coordinate system, in which both x and y are
expressed as fractions, thus allowing most computations to use only
additions, subtractions and multiplications in the field, and requiring only a
single inversion at the end of a complex computation, such as multiplying a
curve point by a scalar. Several such coordinate systems have been
proposed (projective, Jacobian, etc.), leading to a large number of
combinations of coordinate systems and curve equations, and so many
resulting formulas for point addition.
All these formulas differ from each other in terms of performance and
completeness. Completeness expresses whether formulas have special edge
cases that require special handling. The following terminology is used,
when adding points P1 and P2 together:
Incomplete formulas have special cases when P1 and P2 are the same
point, when P1 and P2 are opposite to each other (i.e. their sum is the
point-at-infinity 
), and when either P1 or P2 (or both) are equal to 
.
Unified formulas do not have a special case when P1 = P2. They still
have edge cases for operations involving 
 as input or output operand.
Complete formulas do not have any special case; they can handle all
combinations of input points, including the point-at-infinity.
When making a constant-time implementation, involving secret point
values, incomplete formulas are problematic, because the straightforward

handling of special cases is with a conditional test that detects and handles
special cases separately; the fact that a special case was encountered thus
becomes detectable through timing-based side-channels, and that can leak
information on the involved points and scalars. To avoid this problem, a
complete routine for point addition is convenient. Complete formulas
naturally lead to a complete routine. Unified formulas can be implemented
in a complete routine by adjoining to the point representation a flag that
marks the point as being equal to 
; the routine then uses the normal
formulas, but also uses the flag to efficiently handle the formula edge cases
as a corrective action. If working with incomplete formulas, then the same
principle can be used, but at a substantially higher cost because of the
doubling case (P1 = P2): a complete routine built upon incomplete formulas
must usually compute both the normal point addition formulas and the
specific point doubling formulas, and select the appropriate result in a
constant-time way.
Therefore, it is possible to make a complete routine out of any formulas, but
for improved performance, it is better to start with at least unified formulas.
Unified and complete formulas exist for all curves, but with various costs,
and some non-negligible savings can sometimes be achieved for some
curves by using incomplete formulas in cases where it can be shown a priori
that edge cases are not encountered.
7.4.4.2. Point multiplication
Point multiplication is about computing the point dP for a source point P
and an integer d. The multiplier is often called a scalar to distinguish it
from the field in which point coordinates are expressed; scalars are integers
modulo the order of the curve (or of a subgroup of the curve of which the
provided point P is part); here, we will use q to denote the (sub)group order.
Formally, this operation should be described as “multiplication of a point by
a scalar”, since we are not multiplying two points together. The expression
“point multiplication” is thus an abuse of terminology, but has become a de
facto accepted expression through widespread usage.
Point multiplication can be treated in about the same way as modular
exponentiation. Since the curve group law is traditionally called an
“addition”, point addition is the equivalent of multiplication of modular
integers, and the square-and-multiply algorithm is now called a double-and-

add algorithm. This is, however, the same structure, and window
optimizations apply. As in the case of modular exponentiation, w-NAF
optimizations must not be used in constant-time implementations that
handle secret scalars. Two issues specific to elliptic curves must still be
discussed, about signed windows, and about incomplete formulas.
Signed windows are an additional optimization over the window
optimizations. In the description of the modular exponentiation, the window
contained values xj for j ranging from 0 to 2w − 1. With elliptic curves, we
can halve the table size by storing points jP for j ranging from 1 to 2w−1
instead. The idea is that given the point Q = (x, y), the opposite −Q can
normally be computed very efficiently (with a short Weierstraß curve, −Q =
(x, − y)). Thus, given the table of points jP for j = 1 to 2w−1, we can easily
obtain the points −jP. This allows a modified double-and-add algorithm
with window optimization with the following characteristics:
The scalar d is split into signed chunks di, each in the −2w−1 to +2w−1
range, with the following process: using a carry bit c (initialized to 0)
and processing the bits of e in chunks of w bits in least-to-most
significant order, we consider the value v + c for a chunk of value v:
- if v + c ≤ 2w−1, then emit di = v + c and set c to 0;
- otherwise, emit di = v + c − 2w and set c to 1.
If the (public) maximum length of d is k bits, then ⌈(k + 1)/w⌉ signed
chunks di must be produced to ensure that the final carry value is zero.
Only the points P to 2w−1P are computed and stored in the table.
During the double-and-add algorithm, whenever the point diP must be
obtained from the table, the constant-time lookup is performed on
index |di|, and a constant-time conditional negation is used to compute
−|di|P from the point looked up from the table in case di < 0; similar
constant-time code is used to substitute the point-at-infinity in case di
= 0.

Since signed windows halve the size of the window, hence also its cost of
construction, and the cost of each lookup, they allow the use of larger
windows, thereby improving performance.
Incomplete formulas, as pointed out previously, are inconvenient for
constant-time implementations, but they can to some extent be used for
point multiplication. Indeed, if both following conditions hold:
the source point P is guaranteed to be part of a subgroup of prime
order q, and is not 
;
the scalar d is in the 0 to q − 1 range.
Then it can be shown that none of the point additions in the double-and-add
algorithm with signed windows, except in the last iteration, may involve the
special case of a point added to itself. In other words, we do not have to
worry about additions being in fact doublings in disguise, and incomplete
formulas can thus be used. Note, however, that we still need to maintain
“neutral” flags to handle cases where either the current intermediate result
or the point looked up from the table is the neutral 
; these operations are
not expensive, but they must not be omitted. Also, the last iteration must use
a complete routine: that last iteration may indeed really be a point doubling,
for a specific scalar value. Finally, note the importance of the conditions
expressed above: if the scalar is not lower than the point order, or if the
point order is not prime (e.g. it is not part of the expected subgroup), then
the use of incomplete formulas may fail and produce wrong values.
Some widespread elliptic curves use the short Weierstraß equation; this is
the case, in particular, for the NIST curves P-256, P-384 and P-521, as well
as the well-known secp256k1 curve. When implementing support for such
curves, it is recommended that complete formulas be used (Renes et al.
2016). If, in a given situation, you are desperate for performance, then the
trick with incomplete formulas described above can be used, because these
standard curves also have prime order, and thus validate that an incoming
point fulfilling the curve equation is enough to guarantee that the point is in
the proper prime-order group; this, however, entails some more code
complexity than the direct use of complete formulas, and is thus not
recommended in general.

7.4.4.3. Montgomery Ladder
The Montgomery Ladder is based on the remark that in some curve
equations, the x coordinate of point dP depends only on the scalar d and the
x coordinate of P, not on the y coordinate of P (in other words, dP and −dP
have the same x coordinate). Thus, it is possible to make an x-only point
multiplication algorithm. The algorithm, at any point, maintains the x
coordinates of points nP and (n + 1)P for some integer n; then, at each
iteration:
the points nP and (n + 1)P are added together, yielding the x
coordinate of (2n + 1)P. The formulas leverage the fact that (n + 1)P −
nP is the known point P to avoid using the y coordinate of any point,
which can remain implicit;
one of the points nP and (n + 1)P is doubled, yielding the x coordinate
of either 2nP or (2n + 2)P.
Thus, with a single conditional swap of the two points nP and (n + 1)P, the
iteration produces the x coordinates of either (2nP, (2n + 1)P) or ((2n + 1)P,
(2n + 2)P). Using the bits of the scalar e as control for this swap operation,
the algorithm finally yields the x coordinates of dP and (d + 1)P. The x
coordinate of dP is enough for some protocols (e.g. ECDH, where the
obtained shared secret is indeed defined as the x coordinate of the point).
Moreover, if the y coordinate of P is also known, then the y coordinate of
dP can be computed at moderate cost from the x coordinates of dP and (d +
1) P.
The Montgomery Ladder eschews the use of window optimizations.
However, each iteration is especially efficient when the used curve is a
Montgomery curve (the equation is By2 = x3 + Ax2 + x for two constants A
and B), thus allowing very good performance for point multiplication by a
scalar, with a very simple and size-efficient implementation (both in terms
of code footprint and transient RAM usage). For other curves, similar x-
only ladder formulas exist, but with higher costs (up to about 1.6 times the
cost of a Montgomery curve implementation).
If code compactness and low RAM usage are high-priority goals, then the
use of an x-only ladder is a convenient way to compute point

multiplications; the involved formulas are complete, and a constant-time
implementation is easily achieved with a single primitive (a constant-time
swap of two values), provided that the underlying field operations are
themselves implemented in a constant-time way.
7.5. References
Bernstein, D.J. and Yang, B.-Y. (2019). Fast constant-time GCD
computation and modular inversion. Report 2019/266, Cryptology ePrint
Archive [Online]. Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/266.
Boyar, J. and Peralta, R. (2009). New logic minimization techniques with
applications to cryptology. Report 2009/191, Cryptology ePrint Archive
[Online]. Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2009/191.
Kocher, P.C. (1996). Timing attacks on implementations of Diffie-Hellman,
RSA, DSS, and other systems. In CRYPTO’96, Koblitz, N. (ed.).
Springer, Heidelberg.
Pornin, T. (2020). Optimized binary GCD for modular inversion. Report
2020/972, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/972.
Renes, J., Costello, C., Batina, L. (2016). Complete addition formulas for
prime order elliptic curves. In EUROCRYPT 2016, Fischlin, M. and
Coron, J.-S. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
OceanofPDF.com

8
Protected AES Implementations
Franck RONDEPIERRE
Agence nationale de la sécurité des systèmes d’information, Paris,
France
AES stands for Advanced Encryption Standard and was the algorithm
selected in 2000 after an international competition organized by the
American Institute for Standardization (NIST). The algorithm is designed to
encrypt or decrypt blocks of fixed size (of 16 bytes) with one of three
security levels: 128, 192 or 256 bits. It is very efficient in ensuring
confidentiality and integrity of large amount of data. It can also be used as a
key derivation or a hash function. Due to its efficiency and its robustness,
the AES is probably the most used algorithm for symmetric cryptography
nowadays.
We give hereafter a short overview of the encryption in Algorithm 8.1.
Details will be given in the following sections.
The AES function is a bit faster than its inverse1 and hence has been
selected for encryption, but it can also be used for decryption. It all depends
on the context, such as if we want to speed up the evaluation of encryptions
or decryptions. For instance, if we want to keep data encrypted which we
will often access, we can use the inverse function to “encrypt” it and the
AES function to “decrypt” it.
We will look at the possible ways to implement the AES cryptosystem
while taking into account the running time, the memory footprint and the
security against side-channel attacks.

Algorithm 8.1. AES function
8.1. Generic countermeasures
8.1.1. 1 among N
In order to increase the security of an implementation of a block-cipher, we
can hide the real computation among dummy processes, with a total of N
process. Each process consists of the whole computation with either a

dummy key or the real key. This generic method always applies and is
especially interesting if we cannot access the AES implementation itself,
such as when driving a hardware AES. It also applies, of course, for both
encryption and decryption. In the context of a very fast AES execution
combined with a low probability to mount a successful attack, this
countermeasure can be the most efficient one.
8.1.1.1. Secure “if”
The selection of the correct key shall not leak through the execution,
otherwise an attacker can select the correct process with a post-execution
analysis or, even worse, they may achieve the detection during the
execution with a module that recognizes the leakage. In Algorithm 8.2, we
can see a way to securely implement this selection. Note that the presented
solution requires a bit table s whose memory cost depends on N. How to
efficiently implement this table or how to generate the same bit of
information without a table is generally dependent on the instruction set of
the processor. It may also happen that the hardware module for the AES
already implements this countermeasure and we only have to select the
value of N according to our needs.
8.1.1.2. Values of N
In practice, the size and the form of the value N matters. For instance, we
can restrict N to be a power of 2 (i.e. N = 2a) in order to improve the
generation of r in Algorithm 8.2 (only select a random bits). If N is not a
power of 2, we will have to draw and discard (if r ≥ N) in order to avoid any
bias. For high values of N, it is probably best to remove the restriction about
power of 2, since in this case, the cost needed to generate r will be
negligible against the cost of all AES executions.
Besides, we will often want the loop to support the trivial case N = 1.
Indeed, having N as an input parameter instead of a constant offers two
advantages: the same function can be used for several contexts, and for a
given context, we can adapt the security during the lifetime of a product.

Algorithm 8.2. 1 among N with secure if
8.1.2. Integrity
We have to check the integrity of the key and the encrypted/decrypted block
after an AES computation. Indeed, many attacks rely on disturbing the chip
in order to get a modified intermediate state for a given static key. The more
controlled the fault is, the more information is retrieved about the key.
Detecting each perturbation greatly limits the power of the attacker if we
implement a deadlock mechanism, which accepts only a given number of
detected faults. Due to calibration and low reproductibility of perturbations,
many faults are needed in practice to mount a successful attack. Hence,
even if some perturbations are not detected (like ineffective or safe errors),
we will thwart attacks in practice.
8.1.2.1. Result integrity
This check allows us to detect ephemeral faults. There are two generic
methods to check the integrity of the computed block: compare the results
of two identical executions (E1(x) = E2(x)) or compare the input block with
the result of one execution and its inverse (x = E−1(E(x))). However, if an
attacker is able to inject the same fault twice with good temporal precision,
they will defeat the first countermeasure by disturbing the same operation in
E1 and E2, whereas the inversion E−1 should be different enough from the
direct function E to prevent this attack.

Besides, the more executions, the harder it is to mount an attack. For
instance, you can triple executions (and combine double execution with
inverse computation) with two comparisons or you can also check the
integrity of all (dummy) computed blocks when combined with the “1
among N” countermeasure.
8.1.2.2. Key integrity
It is possible to detect (semi-)permanent faults applied to the key. Once a
key K has been generated, we compute a constant checksum value cK =
C(K) and store it with the key. After the computation of one (or several)
block(s) with the key K, we are now able to detect that a fault occurred if
the values cK and C(K) are different. We may instantiate the function C with
a CRC (polynomial division), a hash function or the AES
encryption/decryption of a constant message. In case of hardware
implementation of the AES, this latter case is likely the best option if we do
not need to reload the key. In case of software implementation, it is also
possible to store both the first round key and the last one. In case we limit
the RAM consumption to only one round key, this will speed up the
decryption and we will be able to check the key scheduling by comparing
the round key used for the final xor with the round key stored.
8.1.2.3. Overall integrity
If we are able to compute several blocks with a unique sequence of
operations, we can use one of these blocks as an integrity block control. For
instance, this is the case with the so-called bitslice implementation where
two (or even four) blocks are simultaneously computed. We can lose some
performance and use one block (out of two or four) for an integrity check.
After the generation of a key K, we have to compute both values cenc =
AES(K, menc) and cdec = AES−1(K, mdec) for given values menc and mdec.
The encryption eb of a block b is hence computed as (eb, c) = AES(K, b,
menc), where c is the check value computed for this block. The integrity of
eb and K is ensured if we have the equality c = cenc.

8.2. Secure evaluation of the SubByte
function
Many operations of the AES are performed in the field 
. An element a
can be represented as a polynomial a = a7 · X7 + a6 · X6 + a5 · X5 + a4 · X4 +
a3 · X3 + a2 · X2 + a1 · X1 + a0 with ai ∈ {0, 1}. Hence, an element a can be
represented as a byte: a7 · 27 + a6 · 26 + a5 · 25 + a4 · 24 + a3 · 23 + a2 · 22 +
a1 · 21 + a0. For example, the byte 2 stands for the element X. For the AES,
this field is defined over 
 with the irreducible polynomial2 X8 + X4 + X3
+ X + 1.
With such a representation, the addition of two elements a and b is
performed with an exclusive-or: a + b = a ⊕ b. The multiplication a · X (or
a · 2) is:
The multiplication of two elements a and b is:
and the inverse of a is the element b such that a · b = 1.
EXERCISE 8.1.–
Compute the result of (X6 + X5 + X + 1) · (X2 + X + 1).

EXERCISE 8.2.–
Perform the Euclidean division of (X5 + X4 + X) by (X2 + X + 1).
EXERCISE 8.3.–
The following sequence is the application of the Euclidean algorithm to
compute the greatest common divisor (gcd) of 0x11b and 0x63:
Deduce from this sequence the inverse of 0x63 in the AES field.
8.2.1. S-box and inverse S-box
The SubByte function is the most critical part of an AES implementation
for the security and the performances.
8.2.1.1. Definition
This function is defined as the application of the same nonlinear function to
each byte of the state. This function is generally represented as a table, the
so-called S-box, and is defined as:
The inverse is taken in 
 (by convention 0−1 = 0), and the 
 linear
function A is defined as:

The inverse B of A is defined as:
Let T denote the inverse of S, i.e. T[x] = (B[x ⊕ 0x63])−1. We also have:
So, we are now able to evaluate the T-box by reusing the code for the S-box
at the expense of some extra xors. This will be useful for section 8.2.6.
8.2.2. Security
The first operation of the AES consists of combining (xoring) a secret key
and the input block. The AES state after this operation is a sensitive value,
which can be the target of side-channel attacks. In order to thwart these
attacks, sensitive values are split in several shares; the more shares, the
better the security. The order t of protection of an implementation refers
here to a number t + 1 of shares. A sensitive value a is noted in lowercase,
the shared variable A is noted in uppercase and denotes the vector of shares
ai. We have:
We will discuss how to evaluate S[x] when x is represented as a shared
variable. We can note that for a function f which is 
 linear, (f(a0), …,
f(at)) is a sharing of f(a). Hence, we will focus on the inversion that is not
 linear.
8.2.3. Secure table lookup
We will look at generic methods to securely evaluate the S-box.

8.2.3.1. S-box
Any S-box can be protected with table recomputations. When targeting only
the first order of protection, the table can be computed once for a whole
AES execution, for constant masks m drawn for this execution:
We can either only compute the table corresponding to the mask m or store
all the 256 tables in non-volatile memory for a total cost of 65,536 bytes,
though this latter solution is a bit overkill. We can note that the mask m is
combined with a potentially known value x when computing the table S′.
Besides, we have at most 252 evaluations of the S-box S′ for one AES
execution (in case of AES 256), which should not be enough to allow a
successful attack to recover the mask m in practice.
When targeting higher orders of protection, the table shall be refreshed
before each evaluation that heavily impacts performances.
8.2.3.2. White box
White box cryptography relies on lookup tables, although it has its own
attacker model. In particular, the key shall be concealed even for the owner
of the storage device. Before any SubByte evaluation, one round key is
added (xored) to the state. Hence, we can merge this addition with the S-
box evaluation. For instance, let ki, j denote the jth byte of the ith round key.
Then the stored tables would look like:
Hence, the 128-bit subkey is no more stored as 128-bit value, but its
information is split between several tables, and tables are very convenient
to implement any function or function composition (on the respective
input/output domains). This principle also applies to different expressions
of the S-box. It is especially used with a sequence of Boolean expressions
equivalent to the S-box. Indeed, when tabulating functions, the smaller the
inputs the less memory consuming. See section 8.2.6 for such sequences.
White box cryptography also relies on many more techniques to increase
the obfuscation.

8.2.4. Evaluation in 
In this section, we will use the definition of the S-box to securely compute
its evaluation. In 
, we have x−1 = x254. There are several ways to
evaluate this exponentiation. For instance, we have:
Both sequences require four multiplications in 
 and three evaluations of
. Depending on how the multiplication is implemented, it can be of
interest to have in the sequence pairs of multiplications with the format a ·
b, a · c.
Since the Frobenius is a linear application (i.e. we have
, it can be efficiently applied to masked
variables. We shall use an ISW algorithm to secure the multiplication a · b
in 
.
8.2.4.1. ISW multiplication
Algorithm 8.3 describes the multiplication of two shared variables A and B.
This algorithm implies (t + 1)2 multiplications and 
 draws of random
values.
Secure usage of the ISW multiplication a · b requires that the shares of A
and B are independent. A mask refreshing is equivalent to an ISW
multiplication by the neutral element 1 (seen as shared value) and allows us

to get new independent shares. No multiplication between shares is required
for a mask refreshing, but we still have to draw as many random values.
8.2.4.2. Multiplication in 
We can first evaluate the multiplication 
 with a lookup
table. This solution offers fast evaluation but the table requires a significant
amount of memory to be stored: 65,536 bytes. We can also split values in
 as the sum of two 4-bit elements. For instance, let a = (a1 · X4 + a0),
the product of 
 becomes:
Algorithm 8.3. ISW multiplication
We can use three tables of 256 bytes each to evaluate the products m · n, m ·
X4, m · X8 with 
.
We can also select a generator α of 
 and use two tables E and L: E[i] =
αi, L[αi] = i.
With these tables, a multiplication is actually transformed into an addition
modulo 255. For 
, we have a · b = E[L[a] + L[b] mod 255]. As
you may have noticed, the multiplication by zero requires a dedicated

process which should not leak through side-channels. We can use another
dedicated table D for this process:
and eventually, we have our multiplication for 
:
EXERCISE 8.4.–
Find a generator α and generate corresponding tables E and L.
EXERCISE 8.5.–
Find an algorithm to efficiently reduce modulo 2n − 1.
8.2.4.3. Frobenius in 
In order to evaluate the Frobenius 
, we can either store a dedicated table
for every value n ∈ {1, 2, 4} or we can use the same tables E, L and D as
for the multiplication:
8.2.4.4. Multiplication 
There are two ways to consider the evaluation of 
: either as one
multiplication or as one function of x.
After the Frobenius application, shares of x and 
 are not independent.
Hence, actually one ISW multiplication and a mask refreshing shall be
performed for the first consideration:

For n > 0, let 
 and let 
. For
, we have:
By using a lookup table to evaluate h, we can speed up the secure
multiplication 
. Only four table lookups are required in the ISW
loop (see Algorithm 8.4) instead of the two multiplications 
 and
. Note that overall the same amount of random values are needed
in both cases (t(t + 1)).
Algorithm 8.4. ISW for the special case 
8.2.5. Tower field
They are many equivalent representations of 
. Canright (2005) and
Boyar and Peralta (2009) use the following constructions:

 is defined over 
 with the polynomial X2 + X + 1 and a root α.
 is defined over 
 with the polynomial X2 + X + α2 and a root β.
 is defined over 
 with the polynomial X2 + X + λ and a root γ,
λ = αβ.
Kim et al. (2011) use slightly different polynomials (X2 + X + α and λ = (α +
1)β) and they actually only need 
. In both cases, the idea is to compute
in practice the inversion in 
. Indeed, for 
, we have
 (since c16 = c) and then x−1 = c−1 · x16.
8.2.5.1. Tower field down to 
Let a = ahγ + aℓ be an element of 
, with 
. We have:
If we list the operations in 
, we have one addition, one square, one λ
product, three multiplications and one inversion (can cost two
multiplications, one square and one fourth power). Elements are small
enough to allow evaluations of these operations through look-up tables.
Especially for the multiplication 
, we can store the
operation in only one table of 256 elements (either 256 bytes, or 128 bytes
if we compress the table).
Besides, two isomorphisms δ and δ−1 are needed to map elements back and
forth between 
 and 
. These mappings are 
 linear and can be
merged with the linear part of the S-box.
If we compare with what is done in 
, we have to evaluate one more
(ISW) multiplication, but each 
 multiplication can be computed more
efficiently.

8.2.5.2. Tower field down to 
As per Boyar and Peralta (2009), we represent 
 using the basis (α, α2),
 using the basis (β2, β8) and 
 using the basis (γ, γ16). Let a
= ahγ16 + aℓγ be an element of 
.We have:
Let m, n be two elements of
 and u, v two
elements of 
. Karatsuba leads
to:
where o(h) = mt · nt + mh · nh and o(h) = mt · nt + mℓ · nℓ. By noting that a
multiplication (respectively an addition) in 
 is a logical AND
(respectively an XOR), we can count the number of binary operations
needed for the multiplication in 
: 9 AND, 26 XOR.
Besides, Boyar and Peralta (2009) found a heuristic to compute an
inversion in 
 with only five AND and 11 XOR. Since an inversion in
 requires three multiplications and an inversion in 
, at least
32 AND are needed so far for the whole inversion.

8.2.6. Bitslice S-box
The AES S-box applies to one byte at a time, which means we can only
evaluate one byte per CPU instruction with a straightforward
implementation. However, modern processors can process more bits per
instruction (typically 32 or 64 bits) and hence processing only 8 bits for the
S-box evaluation is not always optimal.
One solution could be to store a huge table of 232 · 4 bytes (16 gigabytes)
for 32-bit processors (to evaluate 4 bytes with one table lookup). However,
this solution is too expensive in memory and does not work for 64-bit
processors.
8.2.6.1. Boolean sequence
Finding an equivalent Boolean expression to the S-box S (see section 8.2.5)
allows us to achieve bitslice implementation. Given an input byte I = (I7, I6,
I5, I4, I3, I2, I1, I0)2, we look for a sequence of binary operations that allows
us to compute the bits Oi from the bits Ii such that O = S[I] (with O = (O7,
O6, O5, O4, O3, O2, O1, O0)2). Such sequences have been first designed to
generate hardware evaluations of the S-box. Among all the existing
sequences, we are looking for the ones minimizing the number of AND.
Indeed, the secure evaluation of an AND is quadratic in the secure order,
whereas the secure evaluation of a XOR is linear (see Chapter 1 of this
volume). We also need a sequence for both the S-box S and its inverse T.
However, as shown in section 8.2.1, both sequences can have the same
number of nonlinear operations. Figure 8.1 describes a sequence credited to
Çaǧdaş Çalik, whereas Figure 8.2 gives a sequence for the inverse S-box.
8.2.6.2. Bitsliced word
The optimal size of the word is determined by the size of the processor, but
it also determines the number of bytes which shall be processed. Indeed,
one AES state only contains 16 bytes, hence we have to combine several
states to efficiently compute on 32-bit or 64-bit processors. The S-box is
also applied on only 4 bytes while computing the round keys; and in this
case, we should not apply the bitslice technique.

Besides, the organization inside each word is determined by several factors:
the orthogonalization function, and other functions (like ShiftRow and
MixColumn) if you keep the state orthogonalized (see section 8.3.8).
8.2.7. How to select the S-box implementation
We have covered several techniques to securely evaluate the AES S-box.
We will briefly discuss in which context each technique applies.
8.2.7.1. No masking or only one mask
Before considering this case, you should verify twice if this security level
fits your context. If it does, the lookup table is the easiest to implement, and
it is probably the most efficient choice (especially on 8-bit CPU). On
highend CPU, the bitslice implementation might provide the best
performances when several blocks are processed in parallel.
8.2.7.2. Constrained CPU or few S-box computations
We will have to process in the field 
 when parallel computations are not
interesting. This is the case when computing the AES round keys. Indeed,
the S-box applies only on 4 bytes out of 16 and we have to wait for the
computation of a whole round key before computing the next one. This may
also correspond to the case where you can only compute one AES block at a
time (for instance, when using CBC). Besides, if the CPU is limited in
memory access to fetch only bytes or has a small number of registers when
compared to the size of an AES state, then the bitslice technique will not
improve the performances.
8.2.7.3. Highend CPU and S-box computations in parallel
If the CPU can process on a large amount of bits, you should use the bitslice
implementation in order to achieve high performances. To store the AES
state, at least eight words are required (one for each bit of the S-box input).
It means that these words can contain one (respectively, 2, 4) AES state if
the bitsize of a word is 16 (respectively, 32, 64). Hence, most modern CPU
will be able to process several blocks of AES at a time. This can be used to
speed up the encryption of a large sequence of blocks or to increase the
integrity of the result (see section 8.1.2).

Figure 8.1. Bit-sliced AES S-box where (B7, B6, B5, B4, B3, B2, B1, B0)2 is
the input/output
However, the random number generator can severely limit the benefits from
parallel computations. Indeed, when targeting security higher than first
order, we have to generate many random values in order to securely
evaluate AND functions. This generation is expensive (and soon to become
the main task of the AES process) and will be generated at a rate different
from the CPU performances to process logical functions.

Figure 8.2. Bit-sliced AES inv S-box where (B7, B6, B5, B4, B3, B2, B1, B0)2
is the input/output
8.2.7.4. Hardware design
The bitslice technique is well suited for the hardware context since it
requires only Boolean functions. The leakage model is different in this case

due to propagation delays and the permanent evaluation of the functions.
The number of shares and the global design shall take this reality into
account.
8.3. Other functions of AES
8.3.1. State
From an input block of 16 bytes S = (S0, S1, …, S14, S15), the AES state is
internally viewed as a 4 × 4 matrix:
Each byte is considered as an element of 
 as defined in section 8.2.
8.3.2. ShiftRow
The ShiftRow function rotates the rows of the internal state:
and its inverse is just the reverse rotation.
8.3.3. MixColumn
The MixColumn function modifies to the bytes of a column. Each new byte
will depend on all the input bytes of the column. The same transformation is
applied to the four columns. Operations are performed over 
. From the
input state, we get for the first column:

The inverse is:
In order to minimize the computations, we can write the MixColumn as:
and its inverse as:
When using lookup tables for the S-box implementation, we can mix both
functions. While encrypting (respectively, decrypting, see section 8.3.5) a
block, the table stores:
8.3.4. KeyScheduling

A round key k(u) is a sequence of sixteen bytes, or better, a sequence of four
32-bit words: k(u) = (w4u, w4u+1, w4u+2, w4u+3). The key derivation and the
number of round keys depend on the size of the AES key k (128, 192 or 256
bits). The words are defined as follows, where kj denotes the jth word of k
and m (4,6,8) is the key size divided by 32.
Rot denotes a left rotation of the bytes in a word: Rot(S3, S2, S1, S0) = (S2,
S1, S0, S3). SubByte of a word is simply the application of the S-box on the
bytes of the word. The constant Ri is a word (ci, 0, 0, 0), where 
and ci = 2i−1 (c9 = 0x1b and c10 = 0x36). Since k(0) is the first round key
used for encryption, if only k is stored in NVM, then we will have to
compute all the round keys before starting a decryption.
EXERCISE 8.6.–
Write an algorithm that computes all the words and taking as input the
last m words. For instance, if the AES key has 192 bits, the algorithm
computes wj for all j < 48 if given words wi with 48 ≤ i < 54. The same
question if the words wi given as input have indexes 46 ≤ i < 52.
8.3.5. AES inverse function
Algorithm 8.5 shows how to invert the AES function. All steps of the AES
are taken in reverse order and each step is reversed. The AES specification
mentions the possibility to keep the sequence InvSubByte, InvShiftRow,
InvMixColumn in the inverse function. Indeed, the composition of the
functions InvShiftRow and InvSubByte is commutative. Besides, by
linearity, we have InvMixColumn(a ⊕ b) = InvMixColumn(a) ⊕

InvMixColumn(b). Hence, we can perform the InvMixColumn before
adding the round key, if the added round key is:
InvMixColumn(RoundKey(k, i)). This equivalent inverse is interesting
when the S-box is evaluated through table lookup since it allows us to also
precompute the multiplication needed for the InvMixColumn: for a byte x,
the table returns the sequence (T[x] · e, T[x] · 9, T[x] · b, T[x] · d).
Algorithm 8.5. AES Inverse Function
8.3.6. Key generation
Generating the plain value of a key and then masking the key is a
possibility. But, instead, we can generate random values that will be the

shares of a key, whose plain value is never explicitly stored in memory.
Once the shares are generated, you should compute a constant value to
preserve the key integrity against fault attacks (see section 8.1.2). Keys
shall be generated using True Random Generators (see Chapter 5 of Volume
3).
All the round keys can also be generated during the key generation and then
stored in memory. It will save some time during the execution at the
expense of memory. This is especially true for decryption.
8.3.7. Interface
The computation of one block is probably not what you are looking for.
Hence, you should design an interface that will be responsible to handle the
load of the key, the chaining of the blocks according to the block-cipher
mode and the integrity checks (see section 8.1.2). In case of integrity check
failure, the interface returns the appropriate error. Some countermeasures
shall be applied at the block cipher mode level (see Chapter 8 of Volume 1).
8.3.8. Bitsliced state example
Let bi,j denote the jth bit of the state byte Si: bi,j = (Si/2j)&1. After
orthogonalization, the words of the state can be organized as:
where we put all the jth bits in word Wj (we omit to precise the j index for
the bits). This orthogonalization keeps the rows and columns of the AES
state and hence allows efficient implementation of the ShiftRow and
MixColumn functions.
In order to efficiently get this orthogonalization, it is convenient to arrange
order of the input block like this:

By using bit twiddling hacks, we have our orthogonalization. Let (x, y)
denote the result of a function Swaps(a, b) applied on 16-bit values, such
that:
The words shall be updated pairwise by processing all Swaps at each step:
The same sequence of operations allows us to convert back from the
bitsliced state.
EXERCISE 8.7.–
Write the orthogonalization for the case of 32-bit CPU where registers
store the states of two blocks.

EXERCISE 8.8.–
Write the functions ShitRow and InvShiftRow.
8.3.8.1. MixColumn
The MixColumn function can be written as (see section 8.3.3):
which means that two consecutive rows shall be xored. Thanks to our
bitslice construction, a rotation on a word Wj by α (where α is four times the
number of blocks) allows us to rotate the rows of each column. Thanks to
this rotation, we can compute the column S1 from S0 and the column S2 ⊕
S3 from S0 ⊕ S1.
In 
, the multiplication of the byte (b7, b6, b5, b4, b3, b2, b1, b0)2 by 2 (see
section 8.2) is the byte:
So, let Rj = rotrα(Wj), Tj = Wj⊕Rj, Uj = rotr2α(Tj), the whole MixColumn is
computed as:
8.3.8.2. InvMixColumn
The InvMixColumn function can be written as:

In 
, the multiplication of the byte (b7, b6, b5, b4, b3, b2, b1, b0)2 by 4 is
the byte:
The multiplication of the byte (b7, b6, b5, b4, b3, b2, b1, b0)2 by 8 is the byte:
When looking at the whole InvMixColumn operation, it is possible to save
some additions. For instance, in the addition Si × 2 ⊕ Si × 4 ⊕ Si × 8, the
“carry” vector is (0, b7, b6, b5, b5, b6, b5, 0)2.
Let Rj = rotrα(Wj), Sj = rotr2α(Wj), Qj = rotlα(Wj), Tj = Wj ⊕ Rj, Uj =
rotr2α(Tj), the whole InvMixColumn is computed as:
8.4. Notes and further references

Details of the algorithm can also be found in the FIPS 197 standard
publication (NIST 2001). The cost of drawing random shares is often
underestimated, although it may be the most time-consuming part of an
implementation protected against high orders. Some shares can be used to
mask several variables as shown in Coron et al. (2016). Besides, shares
from one variable can mask other variables with the technique of changing
the guards Daemen (2016) used for the AES in Sugawara (2018) and
Askeland et al. (2021).
Section 8.1.2. Look at Chapter 10 of Volume 1 for examples of fault
attacks on AES.
Section 8.2. Look at Chapters 1 and 4 of Volume 3 for more
information about white-box implementations. Coron (2014) published
a secured algorithm to evaluate a table at any order. Mask refreshing
can be done with a complexity 
 as shown in Battistello et
al. (2016), which can be of interest for high orders. Carlet et al. (2015)
actually proved that ISW applies to any 
 bilinear function. Peralta
gathered some circuit references in his homepage (Peralta n.d.).
Hardware implementations have to take into account glitches, for
instance, with threshold implementation (see Chapter 3 of this
volume). S-box implementations process the sensitive value/key by
chunks of 8 bits, which is helpful to mount side-channel attacks as the
principle is to bruteforce chunks of the secrets with the help of
leakages. Bitslice implementations are based on the bit size of the CPU
registers and process bigger chunks of sensitive values (16, 32, 64 or
even 128 bits).
Section 8.3.8. Most optimizations are taken from Bear SSL Pornin
(n.d.), which implements the bitsliced representation of Käsper and
Schwabe (2009).
8.5. References
Askeland, A., Dhooghe, S., Nikova, S., Rijmen, V., Zhang, Z. (2021).
Guarding the first order: The rise of AES maskings. Report 2021/734,
Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/734.

Battistello, A., Coron, J.-S., Prouff, E., Zeitoun, R. (2016). Horizontal side-
channel attacks and countermeasures on the ISW masking scheme. In
CHES 2016, Gierlichs, B. and Poschmann, A.Y. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Boyar, J. and Peralta, R. (2009). New logic minimization techniques with
applications to cryptology. Report 2009/191, Cryptology ePrint Archive
[Online]. Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2009/191.
Canright, D. (2005). A very compact S-box for AES. In CHES 2005, Rao
J.R. and Sunar, B. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Carlet, C., Prouff, E., Rivain, M., Roche, T. (2015). Algebraic
decomposition for probing security. In CRYPTO 2015, Gennaro, R. and
Robshaw, M.J.B. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Coron, J.-S. (2014). Higher order masking of look-up tables. In
EUROCRYPT 2014, Nguyen, P.Q. and Oswald, E. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Coron, J.-S., Greuet, A., Prouff, E., Zeitoun, R. (2016). Faster evaluation of
SBoxes via common shares. In CHES 2016, Gierlichs, B. and
Poschmann, A.Y. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Daemen, J. (2016). Changing of the guards: A simple and efficient method
for achieving uniformity in threshold sharing. Report 2016/1061,
Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/1061.
Ishai, Y., Sahai, A., Wagner, D. (2003). Private circuits: Securing hardware
against probing attacks. In CRYPTO 2003, Boneh, D. (ed.). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Käsper, E. and Schwabe, P. (2009). Faster and timing-attack resistant AES-
GCM. In CHES 2009, Clavier, C. and Gaj, K. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Kim, H., Hong, S., Lim, J. (2011). A fast and provably secure higher-order
masking of AES S-box. In CHES 2011, Preneel, B. and Takagi, T. (eds).
Springer, Heidelberg.

NIST (2001). FIPS 197, Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). National
Institute of Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce.
Peralta, R. (n.d.). Circuit minimization work [Online]. Available at:
http://www.cs.yale.edu/homes/peralta/CircuitStuff/CMT.html.
Pornin, T. (n.d.). Bear SSL [Online]. Avaiable at:
https://bearssl.org/index.html.
Rivain, M. and Prouff, E. (2010). Provably secure higher-order masking of
AES. In CHES 2010, Mangard, S. and Standaert, F.-X. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Sugawara, T. (2018). 3-share threshold implementation of AES s-box
without fresh randomness. IACR TCHES, 1, 123–145.
Notes
1 The inverse of the MixColumn and the key scheduling are slower.
2 If you know the complex numbers, 
 is built over 
 with the irreducible
polynomial X2 + 1.
OceanofPDF.com

9
Protected RSA Implementations
Mylène ROUSSELLET, Yannick TEGLIA and David VIGILANT
Thales DIS, France
9.1. Introduction
9.1.1. The RSA cryptosystem
RSA is the famous public key cryptosystem that takes its name from its
inventors Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir and Leonard Adleman. Since its
introduction in 1977, RSA has become a gold standard for asymmetric
encryption and digital signature in SSL/TLS certificates, crypto currencies
and email encryption. In parallel to its massive deployment, the crypto
community has been regularly publishing new attacks against
implementations exploiting timing, fault and side channel. Building a
resistant RSA implementation is still a practical challenge when considering
skilled experts in labs applying all state-of-the-art attack techniques.
9.1.2. RSA and security recommendations
The best known method to solve the RSA problem is the factorization of the
RSA public modulus, which is the product of two large secret prime
numbers. As no quantum computer is available yet, it provides sufficient
practical security today if RSA keys are large enough and generated
carefully. The security may totally decrease if the prime generation method
showed some bias. Additionally, RSA keys must satisfy some properties in
order to guarantee an optimal security level. Several recommendations
(length of each prime number, difference between the two primes, length of
public and private exponents, etc.) must be followed carefully during key
generation in order to guarantee a good cryptanalytic resistance of the
crypto system. Moreover, several constructions of RSA have been shown to
be insecure. For instance, RSA without padding (plain RSA) as well as
some padding methods like PKCS#1 v1.5 have been shown to be
vulnerable to adaptive inputs attacks. Only robust padding methods must be

used. All of these recommendations can be found in guidance published by
national certification authorities and must be strictly followed. Before
adding countermeasures to an RSA signature implementation, the starting
point of designing a secure device executing RSA signature is to use
recommended methods and recommended parameters.
9.1.3. RSA-CRT and straightforward mode
RSA was introduced in 1977 in its so-called straightforward mode. (N, e) is
the RSA public key and (N, d) the RSA private key such that N = pq, where
p and q are large prime integers, gcd((p − 1), e) = gcd((q − 1), e) = 1 and d
= e−1 mod lcm((p − 1), (q − 1)). The RSA signature of a message m < N is
given by S = md mod N (m represents the padded message).
Main known drawbacks of RSA signature are its relative slowness and its
large key material. 2K RSA is now a standard functionality, and 3K is
recommended by national certification authorities at mid-term. It may be a
strong constraint on embedded devices where few RAM memory is
available and where processors have a clock frequency of only a few tens of
megahertz. RSA is more efficient in Chinese remainder theorem mode
(RSA-CRT) than in straightforward mode. As for straightforward RSA, (N,
e) is the public key. Here, the RSA private key is (p, q, dp, dq, iq) where dp =
e−1 mod (p − 1), dq = e−1 mod (q − 1) and iq = q−1 mod p. RSA-CRT
handles data with half the RSA modulus size and is theoretically about four
times faster. Therefore, it is better suited to embedded devices. The RSA
signature in CRT mode is described step by step in Figure 9.1.

Figure 9.1. RSA-CRT pseudo-code
9.1.4. Toward a device product embedding RSA-CRT
The way toward a secure device embedding RSA-CRT signature requires
some formalization at the device interface level. Common Criteria (CC)
documentation gives a complete framework to build a secure device from
specification to manufacturing. For instance, regarding devices
implementing crypto services, the process of CC certification has already
been applied to the smart card industry for decades. One first step is the
identification of the security functional requirements (SFRs) at the user
level, for example, authentication through RSA-PSS digital signature. Then,
the developer shall build the system and show evidence that there is no
implementation attack that allows for the bypassing of these SFRs. For
instance, implementation attacks (through side channel leakages or
perturbation) may allow for breaking the confidentiality of cryptographic
keys.
For example, for smart cards and related secure cryptographic
implementations, certification authorities provide the mandated evaluators
with an up-to-date list of relevant attack paths published in books and
proceedings of conferences. From this list and from the complete access to
the device architecture, the evaluator is able to perform practical tests on the
most relevant potential vulnerabilities. CC also specifies a comprehensive
way of rating attacks. This allows us to evaluate the resistance level of a
product, assuming that no attack below a defined rating exists.
Concerning RSA signature, several protected implementations have already
been published in conference proceedings, often assuming a context and an
attacker power as a starting point. When designing and developing a secure

embedded RSA-CRT signature, having this CC framework and approach in
mind may be very useful. Indeed, it could ensure that original assumptions
about the context and the attacker power are correct.
The asset considered here will be the confidentiality of the RSA-CRT
private key against side channel and fault attacks. We first gathered the
main related implementation attacks, which have been published for several
decades, and then proposed to review a list of some of the published
countermeasures with their rationale. By parsing the successive steps of the
RSA-CRT pseudo-code in Figure 9.1, and by reviewing some of the main
implementation attacks at each step, this chapter aims to provide a path
toward a secure RSA-CRT signature implementation.
9.2. Building a protected RSA
implementation step by step
The RSA-CRT pseudo-code in Figure 9.1 represents the naive RSA-CRT.
This section will relate a selection of attacks for each step. Examples of
published countermeasures will be proposed in order to break attack paths,
up until the complete secure RSA-CRT signature pseudo-code.
9.2.1. Loading RSA-CRT key parameter – Step 1
9.2.1.1. Considering profiling attacks
Usually the preliminary step of the RSA-CRT signature is to copy the key
elements from nonvolatile memory to a working space in RAM. During this
transfer, an attacker can run a profiling attack in order to recover the private
key elements. This type of profiling attack requires the ability for the hacker
to set many varying keys in an open sample to build templates, train a
neural network or use any supervised learning algorithm. Then, the results
of this training phase will be used to attack a device with unknown keys and
recover the private elements.
To prevent profiling attacks, the key elements must be manipulated in a
secure way [CM1]. They may be shared in random parts so that the relation
between the data manipulated and the secret key elements is broken. The

random shares must be manipulated carefully to avoid any involuntary
unmasking.
Another extra barrier could be the manipulation of key bytes or key words
in a random order (shuffling), different for each execution. Even if this
countermeasure does not thwart the attack in theory, it will increase the
required number of acquisitions, and would make the side channel analysis
too costly or even no longer feasible, for instance, when only a limited
number of executions with the same key is allowed.
9.2.1.2. Considering fault injection on key parameters
Let S = md mod N be the correct signature obtained when signing message
m. During a RSA-CRT computation, an attacker could inject a fault in the
computation of S in order to obtain a faulty signature 
, which is faulty
(either only modulo p or only modulo q). Then, by computing
 the prime number p or q can be recovered. When the
input message m is known, this attack was shown applicable with only one
faulty signature by computing 
.
The initialization of the key and more globally all manipulations of the key
parameters in the RSA-CRT signature are also particularly sensitive to a
Bellcore attack.
A simple way to prevent this attack is to verify the result before sending it
back as the attacker needs the faulty result to perform his attack. This is
done simply by checking if Se actually equals to m [CM5]. This then costs a
verification, usually a few multiplications, but requires to own the public
exponent e which is not always available depending on the API, as, for
instance, in Javacard. Other examples of countermeasures against Bellcore
are also cited later in section 9.2.5.
Additionally, the security of RSA must not be downgraded by using weak
parameters (small modulus, non-prime elements p or q, …). Some attacks
target the modulus N. Faulting some bits of the modulus N can lead to
recover information on private exponent d. Even if this kind of attack
mainly targets the straightforward implementation of RSA, the integrity of
all parameters must be guaranteed in RSA-CRT implementation. To ensure
that the parameters are correct, an integrity value must be associated to each

key element [CM2]. This integrity can be verified whenever in the
algorithm to make sure the data used are still the correct ones.
9.2.2. Message reductions – Step 2
9.2.2.1. Considering side channel analysis
In RSA-CRT, the second step consists of reducing the message m modulo
the primes p and q.
If an attacker is able to choose the input message, the primes p and/or q
may be inferred just by analyzing side channel during the reduction step. In
fact, if the message is already lower that p (respectively, q), in a naive
implementation, the reduction is not performed, while it is computed when
the message is greater than p (respectively, q). This results in a difference in
the execution time. So by testing several messages, an attacker can reduce
the interval containing p (resp q) and find the value of p (respectively, q). A
simple division of N by p will give q.
It is also possible to conduct some statistical attacks like DPA or CPA
during the reduction step. The attacker collects series of traces for signature
of chosen messages that are equidistant: series k are obtained from
messages mi = m − i ∗ 256k, k being the byte length of the prime. The DPA
attack targets the remainder r after reduction step. A gcd computed over the
k DPA results will give the prime value.
To prevent these side channel attacks, two countermeasures can be
implemented. The randomization of prime numbers p and q makes any
statistical attack on several executions unfeasible. Let small random
numbers rp and rq and compute new moduli p′ = rp · p and q′ = rq · q
[CM3]. Usually, random values are small (32, 64 or 128 bits) leading to an
additional cost reasonable for this step. The message reduction must be
computed whatever the value of the message. To enforce this reduction, the
message may be randomized in order to have the same size as N: for a
random value rm, compute m′ = m + rm · N [CM4]. Then the randomized
message m′ is reduced modulo p and q. In RSA-CRT, the modulus N may
be not provided by the application but can be computed from p and q. The
random value rm is usually small as well (32, 64 or 128 bits). The overhead

of this countermeasure is then a large multiplication, a small multiplication
and an addition.
9.2.2.2. Considering faults either mod p or mod q
Injecting a fault in either mp (respectively, mq) would allow us to obtain a
faulty value for Sp (respectively, Sq). A Bellcore attack should be taken into
account during the reduction of the input message. We will refer to the
countermeasures cited in section 9.2.5 to prevent the Bellcore attack.
9.2.3. Exponentiations – Step 3
Exponentiations are the core operations in the RSA signature. In order to
compute mp to the power dp modulo p (respectively, mq to the dq mod q),
the algorithm scans the exponent from right to left, or from left to right.
Exponentiation algorithms execute modular multiplications and modular
squarings, and the values of the temporary variables involved in those
operations depend on the private exponent bit values. As treating exponent
by very small chunk (per bit, or per small window of bits), exponentiations
are particularly subject to implementation attacks.
9.2.3.1. Considering timing and simple side channel analysis
Timing and simple side channel analysis have been the first published
threats targeting exponentiations. They were introduced from the late
1990s.
These attacks exploit every slight differences in the flow that could allow us
to find information about the exponent bits. For instance, squarings can be
implemented in a different (and more effective) way than multiplications
when implemented as multi-precision algorithm entirely in software. On the
one hand, it may allow for a better performance to be achieved. On the
other hand, this would give clear hints to an attacker about the exponent
value when analyzing the timing, or even the actual value through a simple
power analysis of the exponentiation.
Cryptographers have introduced the notion of atomicity in exponentiations.
This formalizes the idea that the developers should use side channel
equivalent blocks of instructions. This makes the execution of one block or

the other indistinguishable from the attacker, whatever the value of the
processed bit of exponent.
From this notion of atomicity, several exponentiation algorithms have been
published with various complexities and intrinsic resistance, for example,
Atomic Square and Multiply, Square and Multiply Always, Montgomery
Powering Ladder and Squaring Always.
Exponentiation atomicity [CM6] needs to be applied when designing the
source code. Ideally from the highest level view (e.g. modular operations),
down to the lowest level view (e.g. CPU assembly selection of exponent
bit), without forgetting intermediary levels (e.g. final subtraction in
Montgomery reduction algorithm). Achieving atomicity may be challenging
and should be verified practically. Differences may not be visible at source
code, but may appear at the execution, due to external events (e.g.
compilation optimizations and cache effects). The overhead added by this
countermeasure depends on the chosen algorithm. Square and Multiply
Always or Montgomery Powering Ladder for example imply two modular
multiplications per bits of exponent, while the original Square and Multiply
implies about 1.5. This means a significant overhead of around 33%.
Even if ever only a very small part of the exponent bits is recovered over a
single execution, due to some noise in the acquisition signal, an attacker
may try to target several different chunks of the exponent successively over
several executions. This may be repeated until recovering a sufficient part
for brute-force, or more sophisticated attacks. Thus it can also be useful to
randomize the exponent as a preventive barrier. For the straightforward
RSA signature, the exponent d is transformed into d′ such that d′ = d + rd ·
ϕ(N) and ϕ is Euler’s totient function. rd is a random number drawn from a
uniform distribution at each signature. In practice for the RSA-CRT,
, respectively, 
[CM7]. Recovering the whole key over multiple acquisitions can be made
rather impossible by this simple countermeasure, given that a sufficient
large length is chosen for the random number. For this countermeasure, the
addition executed during exponent randomization should be implemented
carefully, especially if the single precision of the adder is small. Indeed,
some attacks may exploit the carry leakage during this step. Assuming that

the exponentiations represent 90% of the execution process, the overhead of
exponent randomization is exactly 
.
Additionally, when the message can be freely chosen by the attacker, the
randomization of the exponent has been shown to be insufficient for some
specific input. Moreover, it may sometimes be not possible to guarantee the
atomicity of the Barret or Montgomery modular multiplication (e.g. when
provided by a hardware accelerator and therefore out of control of the
software developer). In such cases, both the message and the modulus
randomization would help in achieving a sufficient security level. The
randomization of the message mp is such that
, with p′ = rp · p
(respectively, 
, with q′ = rq · q). The
exponentiation is then performed modulo p′ (respectively, q′). Assuming
that the exponentiations represent 90% of the execution process, the
overhead of this countermeasure is theoretically about
.
9.2.3.2. Considering side-channel analysis of intermediate
values
By using statistical side channel analysis, and from hypothesis regarding the
exponent bits, an attacker could attempt to correlate some intermediary
values in the exponentiation. For instance, Messerges et al. (1999) proposed
the so-called ZEMD attack based on the DPA introduced by Kocher et al.
(1996). The principle of the ZEMD attack is to confirm or infirm the
hypothesis of exponent bit per bit by classifying intermediate powers of m
according to their high or low hamming weight. This could have been
exploited through CPA too. However, this attack may be complicated to
mount in practice for the specific case of RSA-CRT, since the modulus used
in the modular exponentiation is unknown to the attacker. Hence,
intermediate powers of m cannot be guessed unless no modular reduction is
applied. However, it could be applied for the very first bits until the index j
of an L-bit exponent d with small messages, while intermediate powers of
 are smaller than the modulus.

Another attack targeting intermediate values in the exponentiation is the so-
called doubling attack. For this attack, it is assumed that it is possible to run
successively an exponentiation with a message m and then ma, for example,
with a = 2. Finally, information about exponent bits can be recovered from
the correlation of the same intermediate value appearing at two different
indexes in the two exponentiations.
The attacks of this section can be covered by the same randomization
techniques as for timing and simple side-channel analysis: the
randomization of the exponent and the randomization of the message.
Again, some of these attacks may be harder to mount in practice when the
attacker cannot choose or know completely the input message.
9.2.3.3. Considering safe error
Fault injection attacks have immediately been seen as a threat as they allow
for the recovery of secrets using faulty intermediate variables (either
semipermanent or permanent faults) or faulty data flow (transient faults).
While the countermeasures certainly have a cost, they are pretty easy to
figure out and to implement.
It is usually a matter of redundancy for the variables, the computation or
both. This can happen time-wise, by doing the computation several times in
a sequential order or space-wise by doing the computation in several units
at the same time. Safe error attacks are far more difficult to identify and
solve. They consist of injecting an effective fault that has no outcome on the
final result and then deduce part of the secret from it.
For instance, in the Square and Multiply Always, the else branch is a SPA
countermeasure that actually has no effect on the computation. Hence, if an
attacker succeeds in faulting this useless computation (sometimes called
dummy), the final result is still correct and they thereby know that they were
faulting the else branch and then the value of the secret bit. By performing
several attacks (up to the number of bits of the secret exponent), they can
recover the whole secret.
A countermeasure could then require that each and every variable is
actually involved in the computation so that any error yields an erroneous
result, allowing then to apply the regular countermeasures against fault
injections.

Other countermeasures exist as the exponent blinding: d′ = d + rd · ϕ(N)
[CM7], where rd is a random number drawn from a uniform distribution at
each new usage of the secret key d. Doing so will not prevent the attacker to
fault the dummy branch of the Square and Multiply Always but it will
remove the possibility to discover the exponent bit by bit as each fault will
require a new exponentiation that will in turn yield a new exponent d′ due
to the countermeasure.
Please note that while clever and elegant, this attack is not the easiest to
perform as the attacker shall know that their attack on the dummy variable
or dummy computation actually occurred and was effective and thereby the
lack of error in the final computation is indeed linked to this dummy target.
Said differently, the attacker has to be able to link the absence of an
erroneous result to an effective successful fault on the dummy computation
or variable, which may not be easy from a practical standpoint.
9.2.3.4. Considering combined attacks
Combined attacks is a class of attack that involves a fault injection to
trigger a side-channel vulnerability. Hence such attacks are particularly
suited for breaking algorithms that are protected against side channel. Even
if the algorithm also embeds protection against fault injection, the latter
would be useless as it arrives too late in the processing since the fault
injection already had the opportunity to leak some secret data through the
side-channel medium.
Countermeasures against side-channel attacks and against fault injection
must then be considered as a single one. For instance, we can modify the
parameters of the exponentiation using randomization in a specific way
where a further fault injection will yield computing on garbage data. Such a
technique is called poisoning as not only it modifies the asset but it also
embeds a payload that needs at some point be canceled out. If a fault
injection occurs in between the cancellation does not match the seminal
modification and the final data is garbage.
9.2.3.5. Considering horizontal attacks
Horizontal attack is a class of side-channel attacks that considers only one
execution of the algorithm, here the exponentiation. The goal is to recover

the private exponent from the most significant bit to the least significant bit
by analyzing each modular multiplication separately. It differs from the
classical vertical mode which targets several execution of an algorithm to
recover the secret key.
The first horizontal attack, named the Big Mac attack, is a collision analysis
in one trace. Using the Euclidean distance, the attacker compares each
modular multiplication with a reference to determine if it is a square of a
multiplication by m and recovers the private exponent from most significant
bit to least significant bit. The reference is usually the first multiplication by
m.
The Big Mac attack can be improved by using the correlation analysis on
the Atomic Square and Multiply method. A modular multiplication of x · y is
split into subparts, each corresponding to smaller multiplications xi · yj.
Then the attacker computes the correlation between sub-traces and
messages words. A high level of correlation indicates that the operation is a
multiplication with the message m, otherwise it is a square. The message
randomization [CM4] is a good countermeasure against this attack. Another
way to protect the long integer multiplication itself consists of randomizing
the data inside the multiplication and/or randomizing the execution order of
the internal loops. It appeared that only a fully randomized execution order
of the long integer multiplication algorithm is efficient. We must note that
the randomization of long integer multiplication would be an effective but
costly countermeasure. Even if the number of small multiplications remains
the same, there are additional manipulation of data and it needs further
storage area.
The Square and Multiply Always algorithm is not sensitive to these attacks
as the message is always manipulated, whatever the exponent bit. It is
however sensitive to a cross-correlation attack. The goal is to identify when
two consecutive modular multiplications involve the same operand to
determine if the multiplication with message m was a true or dummy one.
Another way to attack an RSA exponentiation in a single trace is to use
clustering algorithms. Each exponentiation trace is split into single
operations and a clustering algorithm, such as K-means, tries to classify
these operations into two classes (one for bit 0 and the other for bit 1).

When a correct partition is found the attacker just has to assign label 0 or 1
to the two classes to recover the secret exponent.
To improve the clustering algorithm’s efficiency, it was proposed to
combine several measurements (obtained with different probe positions, for
example).
There is no algorithmic countermeasure to theoretically prevent all
horizontal attacks. All of the methods that would reduce the signal-to-noise
ratio, will make the attack more difficult. Generally, from feedback with
practical testings, these are the skills of developers and designers that will
avoid horizontal attacks.
9.2.3.6. Considering faults either mod p or mod q
The exponentiations mod p and mod q are also the target of faults attack.
Whatever the fault injected during one of the two exponentiations, an
attacker can recover p or q by conducting a Bellcore attack. As mentioned
previously, this attack can be prevented by a systematic signature
verification before returning the result. Other countermeasures are
discussed in section 9.2.5.
To prevent fault attacks on exponentiations, several countermeasures have
been proposed in the literature. A first family of countermeasures is based
on extending the modulus by a multiplication with a small random number.
Then from the computation modulo the extended modulus, there must
remain an invariant that can be verified modulo the random number. Let us
choose a random integer t to compute Spt = md mod p · t and Sqt = md mod q
· t. Then we just have to verify the equality Spt = Sqt mod t in order to be
sure that no fault has been injected during the exponentiations. This
technique has inspired several publications.
Another way to protect exponentiations against fault attacks is to use a self-
secure algorithm. The use of the Montgomery Powering Ladder
exponentiation algorithm allows us to prevent fault attacks. Indeed, at each
step of this exponentiation algorithm the couple (a0, a1) is of the form (mα,
mα+1). Then we just have to test if m · a0 = a1 mod N at the end of the
exponentiation to make sure that no fault has been injected. This invariant
between the two outputs has been exploited in some published

countermeasures in order to protect exponentiations against fault attacks,
and more generally to protect RSA-CRT without the extra verification step
using public exponent e.
Other published propositions were based on double addition chains. The
idea consists of processing a double exponentiation to compute the pair (md,
mϕ(N)−d) mod N by using addition chains for exponents. The consistency of
the exponentiation can be verified by computing md · mϕ(N)−d ≟ 1 mod N.
9.2.4. Recombination – Step 4
9.2.4.1. Considering side-channel analysis
Attacking the recombination using side-channel analysis will leverage
macroscopic consumption or EM pattern that may result from this very
step.
First, we can think of a coarse grained attack using a SPA for targeting
macroscopic consumption or EM patterns. A good candidate is, for instance,
the inner multiplication of (Sp − Sq) by iq. If at some point, one of those
quantities equals 0, then the further multiplication will be done by a null
operand which triggers the biggest Hamming difference in the registers
containing the result as half of the bits will flip. This will happen if Sp
equals Sq for some reason for instance. The attacker then needs to craft
specific messages to reach this goal.
Another finer-grained possibility would be to look at a CPA like attack on
the same step of the algorithm by noticing that it can be transformed from
into x = S · q−1 as Sq is only half the size of S.
In a regular CPA, the attacker needs to be able to exhibit a relationship
between a known variable and the secret quantity that will yield an
intermediate value producing a side-channel effect. Here as S is known, the
attacker can setup q which are the hypotheses on the secret value q to
mount a CPA-like attack where x is the intermediate value. Please note that
since q is too large to exhaust all of the possible hypotheses, the attacker
will need to adopt a divide-and-conquer approach by breaking it into
smaller chunks.

9.2.4.2. Considering faults either mod p or mod q
The recombination is also a window sensitive to fault attacks. Whatever the
injected fault, an attacker can recover p or q by conducting a Bellcore
attack. As mentioned previously this attack can be prevented by a
systematic signature verification before returning the result. Other
countermeasures are discussed in section 9.2.5.
9.2.5. Return S
As already discussed, S should be returned only if it is guaranteed that there
was no perturbation, at least no perturbation only modulo p or only modulo
q.
The verification Se ≟ m after the signature implies only a few modular
multiplications. This countermeasure avoids the attack path while being
negligible in terms of overhead. But it requires the public exponent e to be
available, which is not always the case depending on the API. For example,
in the Javacard API, only private elements are given in the interface for the
private operation (signature or decryption).
Several papers proposing a global alternative to verification have been
published when public exponent is not available.
These methods have been described in more details in section 9.2.3.6. Some
methods are based on modulus extension combined with consistency
verification in the small ring. Some others would exploit relations that are
inherent to a given exponentiation algorithm.
Protecting RSA exponentiations is important. But it must be guaranteed that
all steps of the RSA-CRT signature are covered by a global fault detection
mechanism, so that no exploitable faulty signature is returned to an attacker.
9.2.6. Protected RSA-CRT pseudo-code
Bringing together all countermeasures discussed in the previous sections,
Figure 9.2 presents an example of protected RSA-CRT pseudo-code.
Simple side-channel, horizontal and combined attacks on exponentiations
have to be tackled by the developer. The related countermeasures are not
explicitly mentioned here in the pseudo-code.

Figure 9.2. Protected RSA-CRT pseudo-code
9.3. Remarks and open discussion
9.3.1. Security resistance consideration
This chapter aims to review the way up to a protected RSA implementation.
By starting from a selection of attacks, the RSA-CRT signature pseudo-
code has been scanned step by step, and countermeasures have been
presented for each phase. Applying this methodology has implied a
subjective choice at the starting point regarding what are the considered
attacks. We have selected a considerable list that sounded reasonable to us.

Extra attacks (or fewer) could have been taken into account as a starting
point, resulting to another protected pseudo-code.
Some concepts have been reviewed at relative high level. For instance, the
timing, simple side channel, horizontal analysis and combined attacks on
exponentiations have been discussed, but the related practical resistance
remains challenging, and based on the developer’s and the evaluator’s
expertise.
In the same way, some main types of published countermeasures have been
discussed. But there exists a variety of details and configurations that is left
to the developers. This can be configured depending on the context of the
final use case (e.g. RSA modes to be supported, unavailability of some
public key material, limitation regarding the number of possible signatures,
etc.), depending on the hardware platform (e.g. resource and inherent
resistance against attacks) and depending on expected performance (e.g.
transaction timing limit). All of these constraints are specific to the user
context, and this makes a generic definition of a protected implementation
barely impossible.
A complete methodology to build a protected RSA could also comprise a
formal verification phase. Formal verification could theoretically give an
entire confidence about the security level of an implementation. However,
the related abstraction level is often subject to trade-off when coming to
engineering. On the one hand, the formal verification at assembly level
gives assurance that a given binary is secure on a specific chip. But
applying formal proof at assembly level with a huge number of lines of
code can represent a prohibitive effort. On the other hand, proving formally
the resistance at pseudo-code level is portable and allows us to validate
countermeasures with reasonable workload, but it does not give the full
guarantee that no vulnerability has been introduced from the pseudo-code to
the execution of the binary on the hardware platform.
9.4. Notes and further references
Section 9.1.1. The concept of asymmetric cryptosystem was already
introduced by Diffie and Hellman but in the context of key exchange.
RSA inventors published the first asymmetric cryptosystem for public

key encryption/signature in Rivest et al. (1978). In the late 1990s, the
British Government Communication Headquarter (GCHQ)
declassified some research documents where the same idea was
discussed already from 1973.
Section 9.1.2. Special care has to be taken when generating RSA keys.
Cryptanalysis exist when RSA keys do not respect some
recommendations regarding distance between primes, length of private
and public exponents. For instance, Boneh (1999) gives a list of main
known cryptanalysis. Additionally, some bias in the prime generation
algorithm leading to a complete secret recovery were highlighted by
researchers in Bernstein et al. (2013) and Nemec et al. (2017). A
complete key generation algorithm, which is considered without bias,
is specified in NIST (2013). Other additional recommendations
regarding key lengths for example are given by national certification
authorities in NIST (2013); ANSSI (2020); BSI (2021). Because of its
multiplicative relations (e.g. 
), RSA without
padding is known to be vulnerable against chosen input attacks. RSA
laboratories specified padding schemes to be applied to the input
before encryption or signature. RSA Paddings PKCS#1 v1.5 were
introduced by RSA laboratories, which was supposed to make RSA
semantically secure and protected against chosen input attacks.
Unfortunately, these versions of padding schemes were demonstrated
insufficient for some adaptative input attacks Bleichenbacher et al.
(1997); Brier et al. (2001); Coron et al. (2009). It is now recommended
to use RSA with Optimal Asymmetric Encryption Padding (OAEP) or
Probabilistic Signature Scheme (PSS) specified in PKCS#1 v2.1
Jonsson and Kaliski (2003).
Section 9.1.4. JIL (2020) provides a comprehensive way to rate
attacks, from objective success requirements in several categories:
knowledge of the product, expertise of the attacker, elapsed time,
equipment, access to one or more devices, etc.). The more
requirements for the attacks, the biggest score given by category.
Scores by category are agreed and updated regularly in subgroups
bringing together mandated labs, certification authorities and industry
vendors. The sum of all scores gives the attack rating. Several
thresholds are specified for several security levels, and the product

cannot claim a corresponding security level if a successful attack
performed by a mandated labs with a rating below this threshold
exists.
For example, Shamir (1997); Blömer et al. (2003); Giraud (2006); Kim
and Quisquater (2007); Courrege et al. (2010) proposed complete
protected RSA signature algorithms, all assuming an attacker power
and an execution context (memory footprint, available parameters,
etc.).
Section 9.2.1. Before real fault injection on RSA cryptosystems
becomes reality, Boneh et al. (1997) proposed a theoretical way to
inject faults in the RSA-CRT signature, called a Bellcore attack, from
the name of the company where the authors worked. The idea is to
exploit an injection of fault in the signature either only modulo p or
only modulo q. To reach this effect, the attacker can target the key
parameters during the initialization, but also any step of the RSA-CRT
signature. They showed that with only two RSA-CRT signatures they
can recover p or q and factorize N. In Joye (1999), the authors shown
that the attack is also applicable with only one faulty signature when
the message is known.
Some attacks, introduced by Seifert (2005), aim at modifying the
public modulus N during verification in order to obtain a prime
number. Then the attacker is able to compute  from modified 
 and
e to initiate fraudulent signatures.
The most natural way to protect signature against fault injection could
be to perform a verification just after the signature by using the public
key. It can be checked. However, in some context, it may be not so
easy to access the public key. Indeed, interface is sometimes specified
very strictly for inter-operability reasons. For example, the Java card
3.1 documentation (Oracle 2019) specifies the RSA-CRT private key
(p, q, dp, dq, iq) and the RSA-CRT public key (N, e). Moreover, it is
specified that when performing a private operation (signature or
deciphering), the caller could access only the private key buffer. This
means that the public exponent may be not available for the
implementation of a countermeasure based on the verification of the
signature.

Section 9.2.2. Boer et al. (2003) presented a variant of the DPA attack
named MRED in 2002 which targets the message reduction modulo p
or q. The attack must have the possibility to choose the message which
is not necessary the case in many applications. Later, Amiel et al.
(2007) suggested an improvement by using CPA to recover p or q with
just the knowledge of the message (no need to choose it anymore).
Section 9.2.3.1. Timing and simple side channel analysis have been the
first published threats targeting exponentiations. The first timing attack
on RSA was introduced from the late nineties by Kocher (1996).
Schindler also proposed a timing attack on exponentiations for the
RSA-CRT later in Schindler (2000) by analyzing the timing leakages
in Montgomery’s algorithm for modular operations.
Chevallier-Mamès et al. (2003) introduced the concept of side channel
atomicity in exponentiation in 2003. The idea consists of finding a
common block of instructions (potentially including dummy
instructions) such that all of the processes using this common block are
indistinguishable through side-channel analysis. In RSA, the atomicity
in exponentiations were applied to several algorithms: Atomic Square
and Multiply (Joye 2002; Chevallier-Mames et al. 2003); Square and
Multiply Always (Coron 1999); Montgomery Powering Ladder (Joye
and Yen 2003); Squaring Always (Clavier et al. 2011). Heninger and
Shacham (2009) proposed an algorithm to reconstruct RSA private
keys from a minimum of 27% of known bits.
Randomization of the exponent was first introduced by Kocher (1996)
and extended to elliptic curves by Coron (1999). For the size of the
random integer used when blinding the exponent, Schindler and Itoh
(2011) and Schindler and Wiemers (2014) published several studies
about the minimum size to be chosen depending how far the attacker is
able to get partial leakage over several executions. Additionally, when
the message can be freely chosen by the attacker, the randomization of
the exponent has been shown to be insufficient for some specific input
(Courrege et al. 2010; Schindler and Itoh 2011). In such cases, both the
message and the modulus randomization would help achieving a
sufficient security level (Mittmann and Schindler 2021; Dugardin et al.
2021).

Fouque et al. (2008) showed that the randomization operation itself
may leak statistical information about d when studying the propagation
of carry bits during the addition operation (d′ = d + rd · ϕ(N)).
Section 9.2.3.2. Messerges et al. (1999) presented several statistical
analyses on RSA. Depending on the possibility given to the attacker to
choose/know several exponents or data, different DPA can be applied.
Among them, the ZEMD (Zero-Exponent Multiple-Data) allows for
the recovery of the private exponent bit per bit. Later Fouque and
Valette (2003) published the doubling attack. First, proposed on
elliptic-curve scalar multiplication, this attack is easily application to
RSA exponentiation.
Section 9.2.3.3. Safe error attacks on modular exponentiation have
been tacked first, which was illustrated by Joye and Yen (2003) and
denoted as M-safe error attack, where they showed that having a
dummy variable might yield an attacker to recover the secret. They
solved it by proposing a countermeasure where each and every
variable as actually a functional purpose and whose faulting will result
in an actual error that can be caught by regular means as redundancy.
Please note that their first counter-measure against M-safe error
attacks was also error-prone, as it was possible to mount a clever yet
realistic attack to overcome the protection. This resulted in a C-safe
error attack for which a counter-measure has also been presented and
known as the final version of the Montgomery Powering Ladder.
Section 9.2.3.4. Combined attacks have been described in Amiel et al.
(2007) such as PACA (Passive and Active Combined Attacks). The
targeted algorithm was protected against side channel attack using
message randomization and atomicity, but also against fault injection
by performing the verification using the public exponent. Such a
combination of countermeasures may seem strong at the first glance,
yet the authors have found a flaw.
Their attack consists of faulting the randomization in the initialization
of one intermediate variable, expecting a partial set to 0, so that the
intermediate computation will have a characteristic power
consumption profile, revealing by SPA the location of the
multiplications by the faulted parameters in the signal and thereby the

secret bits of the exponent. They then proposed a set of
countermeasures that aim at poisoning the computation in case of fault
injection, yielding then no specific pattern in the power consumption
trace that would reveal the secret. Hence as soon as a fault is injected,
it will turn in performing a modular exponentiation with a faulty
private key whose recovering by SPA will not bring any knowledge
about the actual private key.
Section 9.2.3.5. The Big Mac attack was presented by Walter in 2001
(Woodruff and Zhou 2022). It is an horizontal collision attack targeting
the Square and Multiply exponentiation with unknown message. Each
modular multiplication is made of elementary operations xi · yj. The
attack consists in computing the Euclidean Distance between two sets
of elementary operations to differentiate when common operands are
involved in two multiplications. This allows for the distinction
between square and multiplication and the recovery of the exponent
bits. Then the concept of horizontal attacks was generalized by Clavier
et al. (2010) and formalized in Bauer et al. (2013).
The Square and Multiply Always algorithm was the target of a cross-
correlation attack detailed in Witteman et al. (2011). Contrary to the
Square and Multiply, the correlation is computed between a
multiplication and the following square. When a same operand is
shared by these two operations, the multiplication was a dummy one
and the exponent bit a 0.
Many clustering attacks on RSA were published Heyszl et al. (2013);
Specht et al. (2015); Perin et al. (2014) and Perin and Chmielewski
(2015).
Section 9.2.3.6. A first family of countermeasures against the injection
of a fault in the exponentiations either modulo p or modulo q has been
introduced by Shamir (1997). This method is based on the extension of
the modulus by a multiplication by a small random number. This
solution assumed that d is available in the key buffer, which is not
always the case. Its recomputation could be costly in some cases. This
technique has inspired several publications, such as Aumüller et al.
(2003); Blömer et al. (2003); Ciet and Joye (2005); Coron et al.
(2010), based on modulus extension as well.

Several researchers have exploited specific exponentiation algorithms
that can output several results, coming a given mathematical relation
between them. This allows to perform multiple recombinations and
checking whether mathematical relation still holds. For example, the
property of Montgomery Powering Ladder has been exploited in
Giraud (2006). The Montgomery Powering Ladder computes both (md,
md+1). By performing two recombinations, one with expected outputs
 giving the expected signature S, the other with the extra
outputs 
 giving an extra signature S*, it is possible
to verify at the end that S* = m · S. Boscher et al. (2009) also proposed
another secure RSA-CRT implementation based on a specific left-to-
right exponentiation algorithm. Rivain (2009) proposed a solution
based on double addition chains. The idea consists of processing a
double exponentiation to compute the pair (md, mϕ(N)−d) mod N by
using addition chains for exponents. The consistency of the
exponentiation can be verified by computing md · mϕ(N)−d ≟ 1 mod N.
Section 9.2.4.1. Novak (2002) proposed a clever adaptive chosen
plaintexts SPA attack on the RSA-CRT. Instead of simply looking at
the raw traces, he rather took advantage of the recombination step,
namely, S = Sq + q · (iq · (Sp − Sq) mod p), searching for a specific
behavior.
As such, he targeted the case where Sp is equal to Sq to generate a 0 in
the subsequent multiplication by iq thus yielding a characteristic
pattern in the signal, as all intermediate bits will be equal to 0. This is
made possible by crafting inputs Mi so that:
Knowing that (Md)e = M, the attacker will then craft inputs M = Xe to
remove the contribution of the private exponent. This hence yields:
The equality will occur as soon as the modular reductions do not
operate, namely when Xi is smaller than the both moduli. Starting with

 and going left toward 1 or right toward N using a
dichotomic approach allows an adaptive attack using the feedback of
whether or not Sp = Sq when looking at the trace, thus disclosing a bit
of p at each step. Afterwards, q is recovered by simply dividing N by p.
A regular way to prevent this attack is to randomize the both moduli p
and q with p′ = p · rp, q′ = q · rq [CM3], where rp and rq are two
random numbers that shall follow a uniform distribution to avoid
weaknesses. Afterward, the contribution of the random numbers has to
be removed to recover a computationally correct result. The
countermeasure comes then at the cost of two additional modular
multiplications and three additional modular reductions, hence five
modular multiplications overall.
Another attack on the RSA-CRT has been illustrated by Witteman
(2009). As previously, this is the recombination step which is targeted:
Witteman (2009) further noted that actually: S ≈ x · q as Sq is only half
the size of S, yielding x = S · q−1
As x is an intermediate value, he further performed a CPA by making
hypotheses on the least significant bit of q, as S is assumed to be
known. He was then able to iteratively recover q.
This is a powerful attack that could be thwarted by using the same
countermeasure used for the previous SPA attack by Novak (2002).
Section 9.3.1. Several attempts of using formal methods in order to get
a proof of resistance against a Bellcore attack for a given RSA-CRT
implementation have been published by researchers Christofi et al.
(2013); Rauzy and Guilley (2014); Kiss et al. (2016). The starting
point for this verification is an implementation in a given
programming language (compatible with the formal tool that checks
mathematical properties) and a given fault model (possible fault
injections). The property to be formally verified in general is “the
faulty result is not exploitable”, meaning “the signature is never faulty
only modulo p or only modulo q”. The formal tools allow us to

automatically inject all possible faults exhaustively while checking
whether the required property is still met, leading to a formal proof.
Recently, promising methodologies and tools for proving the resistance
of implementations against side-channel attacks have also been
published, but still mainly practically tested on symmetric
cryptography (Bloem et al. 2018; Meunier et al. 2021).
9.5. References
Amiel, F., Feix, B., Villegas, K. (2007). Power analysis for secret
recovering and reverse engineering of public key algorithms. In SAC
2007, Adams, C.M., Miri, A., Wiener, M.J. (eds). Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg.
ANSSI (2020). Règles et recommandations concernant le choix et le
dimensionnement des mécanismes cryptographiques Document, ANSSI-
PG-083 [Online]. Available at:
https://www.ssi.gouv.fr/uploads/2021/03/anssi-guide-
mecanismes_crypto-2.04.pdf.
Aumüller, C., Bier, P., Fischer, W., Hofreiter, P., Seifert, J.-P. (2003). Fault
attacks on RSA with CRT: Concrete results and practical
countermeasures. In CHES 2002, Kaliski Jr., B.S., Koç, Ç.K., Paar, C.
(eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Bauer, A., Jaulmes, É., Prouff, E., Wild, J. (2013). Horizontal and vertical
side-channel attacks against secure RSA implementations. In CT-RSA
2013, Dawson, E. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Bernstein, D.J., Chang, Y.-A., Cheng, C.-M., Chou, L.-P., Heninger, N.,
Lange, T., van Someren, N. (2013). Factoring RSA keys from certified
smart cards: Coppersmith in the wild. In ASIACRYPT 2013, Sako, K.
and Sarkar, P. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Bleichenbacher, D., Joye, M., Quisquater, J.-J. (1997). A new and optimal
chosen-message attack on RSA-type cryptosystems. In ICICS 97, Han,
Y., Okamoto, T., Qing, S. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

Bloem, R., Iusupov, R., Krenn, M., Mangard, S. (2018). Sharing
independence & relabeling: Efficient formal verification of higher-order
masking. Report 2018/1031, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online].
Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/1031.
Blömer, J., Otto, M., Seifert, J.-P. (2003). A new CRT-RSA algorithm secure
against Bellcore attacks. In ACM CCS 2003, Jajodia, S., Atluri, V.,
Jaeger, T. (eds). ACM Press, New York. doi: 10.1145/948109.948151.
den Boer, B., Lemke, K., Wicke, G. (2003). A DPA attack against the
modular reduction within a CRT implementation of RSA. In CHES
2002, Kaliski Jr., B.S., Koç, Ç.K., Paar, C. (eds). Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg.
Boneh, D. (1999). Twenty years of attacks on the RSA cryptosystem.
Notices of the AMS, 46, 203–213.
Boneh, D., DeMillo, R.A., Lipton, R.J. (1997). On the importance of
checking cryptographic protocols for faults (extended abstract). In
EUROCRYPT’97, Fumy, W. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Boscher, A., Handschuh, H., Trichina, E. (2009). Blinded fault resistant
exponentiation revisited. In Sixth International Workshop on Fault
Diagnosis and Tolerance in Cryptography, FDTC 2009, Breveglieri, L.,
Koren, I., Naccache, D., Oswald, E., Seifert, J. (eds). IEEE, Lausanne.
doi: 10.1109/FDTC.2009.31.
Brier, E., Clavier, C., Coron, J.-S., Naccache, D. (2001). Cryptanalysis of
RSA signatures with fixed-pattern padding. In Advances in Cryptology –
CRYPTO 2001, Kilian, J. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
BSI (2021). BSI TR-02102-1: “Cryptographic Mechanisms:
Recommendations and Key Lengths” Version: 2021-1. Technical
Guideline [Online]. Available at:
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/EN/BSI/Publications/T
echGuidelines/TG02102/BSI-TR-02102-1.html.
Chevallier-Mames, B., Ciet, M., Joye, M. (2003). Low-cost solutions for
preventing simple side-channel analysis: Side-channel atomicity. Report

2003/237, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2003/237.
Christofi, M., Chetali, B., Goubin, L., Vigilant, D. (2013). Formal
verification of a CRT-RSA implementation against fault attacks. Journal
of Cryptographic Engineering, 3(3), 157–167.
Ciet, M. and Joye, M. (2005). Practical fault countermeasures for Chinese
remaindering based RSA (extended abstract). In PROC. FDTC’05,
16196472 [Online]. Available at:
https://marcjoye.github.io/papers/CJ05fdtc.pdf.
Clavier, C., Feix, B., Gagnerot, G., Roussellet, M., Verneuil, V. (2010).
Horizontal correlation analysis on exponentiation. In ICICS 10, Soriano,
M., Qing, S., López, J. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Clavier, C., Feix, B., Gagnerot, G., Roussellet, M., Verneuil, V. (2011).
Square always exponentiation. In INDOCRYPT 2011, Bernstein, D.J.
and Chatterjee, S. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Coron, J.-S. (1999). Resistance against differential power analysis for
elliptic curve cryptosystems. In CHES’99, Koç, Ç.K. and Paar, C. (eds).
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Coron, J.-S., Naccache, D., Tibouchi, M., Weinmann, R.-P. (2009). Practical
cryptanalysis of ISO/IEC 9796–2 and EMV signatures. In CRYPTO
2009, Halevi, S. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Coron, J-J., Giraud, G., Morin, N., Piret, G., Vigilant, G., (2010). Fault
attacks and countermeasures on vigilant’s RSA-CRT algorithm. In 2010
Workshop on Fault Diagnosis and Tolerance in Cryptography, 89–96.
IEEE, Santa Barbara.
Courrege, J.-C., Feix, B., Roussellet, M. (2010). Simple power analysis on
exponentiation revisited. In CARDIS 2010, Gollman, D. and Lanet, J.-L.
(eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Dugardin, M., Schindler, W., Guilley, S. (2021). Stochastic methods defeat
regular RSA exponentiation algorithms with combined blinding

methods. J. Math. Cryptol., 15(1), 408–433. doi: 10.1515/jmc-2020-
0010.
Fouque, P.-A. and Valette, F. (2003). The doubling attack – Why upwards is
better than downwards. In CHES 2003, Walter, C.D., Koç, Ç.K., Paar, C.
(eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Fouque, P.-A., Réal, D., Valette, F., Drissi, M. (2008). The carry leakage on
the randomized exponent countermeasure. In CHES 2008, Oswald, E.
and Rohatgi, P. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Giraud, C. (2006). An RSA implementation resistant to fault attacks and to
simple power analysis. IEEE Trans. Computers, 55(9), 1116–1120.
Heninger, N. and Shacham, H. (2009). Reconstructing RSA private keys
from random key bits. In CRYPTO 2009, Halevi, S. (ed.). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-03356-8_1.
Heyszl, J., Ibing, A., Mangard, S., De Santis, F., Sigl, G. (2013). Clustering
algorithms for non-profiled single-execution attacks on exponentiations.
Report 2013/438, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2013/438.
JIL (2020). Application of attack potential to smartcards and similar devices
version 3.1. Document, Joint Interpretation Library [Online]. Available
at: https://www.sogis.eu/documents/cc/domains/sc/JIL-Application-of-
Attack-Potential-to-Smartcards-v3-1.pdf.
Jonsson, J. and Kaliski, B. (2003). Public-key cryptography standards
(PKCS) 1: RSA cryptography specifications version 2.1. Standard,
RFC3447, The Internet Society [Online].
Available at: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3447.
Joye, M. (2002). Recovering lost efficiency of exponentiation algorithms on
smart cards. Electronics Letters, 38, 200–2.
Joye, M. and Yen, S.-M. (2003). The Montgomery powering ladder. In
CHES 2002, Kaliski Jr., B.S., Koç, Ç.K., Paar, C. (eds). Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/3-540-36400-5_22.

Joye, M., Lenstra, A.K., Quisquater, J-J. (1999). Chinese remaindering
based cryptosystems in the presence of faults. J. Cryptol., 12(4), 241–
245. doi: 10.1007/s001459900055.
Kim, C.H. and Quisquater, J.-J. (2007). How can we overcome both side
channel analysis and fault attacks on rsa-crt? In Workshop on Fault
Diagnosis and Tolerance in Cryptography. IEEE, Vienna.
Kiss, Á., Krämer, J., Rauzy, P., Seifert, J.-P. (2016). Algorithmic
countermeasures against fault attacks and power analysis for RSA-CRT.
In COSADE 2016, Standaert, F.-X. and Oswald, E. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Kocher, P.C. (1996). Timing attacks on implementations of Diffie-Hellman,
RSA, DSS, and other systems. In CRYPTO’96, Koblitz, N. (ed.).
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Messerges, T.S., Dabbish, E.A., Sloan, R.H. (1999). Power analysis attacks
of modular exponentiation in smartcards. In CHES’99, Koç, Ç.K. and
Paar, C. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Meunier, Q.L., Pons, E., Heydemann, K. (2021). LeakageVerif: Scalable
and efficient leakage verification in symbolic expressions. Report
2021/1468, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/1468.
Mittmann, J. and Schindler, W. (2021). Timing attacks and local timing
attacks against Barrett’s modular multiplication algorithm. Journal of
Cryptographic Engineering, 11(4), 369–397.
Nemec, M., Sýs, M., Svenda, P., Klinec, D., Matyas, V. (2017). The return
of coppersmith’s attack: Practical factorization of widely used RSA
moduli. In ACM CCS 2017, Thuraisingham, B.M., Evans, D., Malkin, T.,
Xu, D. (eds). ACM Press, New York.
NIST (2013). FIPS 186-4, Digital Signature Standard (DSS). Standard,
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg. doi:
10.6028/NIST.FIPS.186-4.

Novak, R. (2002). SPA-based adaptive chosen-ciphertext attack on RSA
implementation. In PKC 2002, Naccache, D. and Paillier, P. (eds).
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Oracle (2019). Java card 3.1 documentation [Online]. Available at:
https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javacard/3.1/.
Perin, G. and Chmielewski, L. (2015). A semi-parametric approach for side-
channel attacks on protected RSA implementations. In CARDIS,
Homma, N. and Medwed, M. (eds). Springer, Cham.
Perin, G., Imbert, L., Torres, L., Maurine, P. (2014). Attacking randomized
exponentiations using unsupervised learning. In COSADE 2014, Prouff,
E. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Rauzy, P. and Guilley, S. (2014). A formal proof of countermeasures against
fault injection attacks on CRT-RSA. Journal of Cryptographic
Engineering, 4(3), 173–185.
Rivain, M. (2009). Securing RSA against fault analysis by double addition
chain exponentiation. In CT-RSA, Fischlin, M. (ed.). Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg.
Rivest, R.L., Shamir, A., Adleman, L. (1978). A method for obtaining
digital signatures and public-key cryptosystems. Communications of the
ACM, 21(2), 120–126.
Schindler, W. (2000). A timing attack against RSA with the Chinese
remainder theorem. In CHES 2000, Koç, Ç.K. and Paar, C. (eds).
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Schindler, W. and Itoh, K. (2011). Exponent blinding does not always lift
(partial) spa resistance to higher-level security. In ACNS 11, Lopez, J.
and Tsudik, G. (eds). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Schindler, W. and Wiemers, A. (2014). Power attacks in the presence of
exponent blinding. Journal of Cryptographic Engineering, 4(4), 213–
236.
Seifert, J.-P. (2005). On authenticated computing and RSA-based
authentication. In ACM CCS 2005, Atluri, V., Meadows, C., Juels, A.

(eds). ACM Press, New York.
Shamir, A. (1997). Method and apparatus for protecting public key schemes
from timing and fault attacks. United States Patent 5,991,415 [Online].
Available at: https://www.torsten-
schuetze.de/sommerakademie2009/papers/Shamir_US_Patent_1999.pdf.
Specht, R., Heyszl, J., Kleinsteuber, M., Sigl, G. (2015). Improving non-
profiled attacks on exponentiations based on clustering and extracting
leakage from multi-channel high-resolution EM measurements. In
COSADE 2015, Mangard, S. and Poschmann, A.Y. (eds). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
Witteman, M.F. (2009). A DPA attack on RSA in CRT mode. Riscure
Technical Report [Online]. Available at:
http://www.cadshop.ru/articles/3.pdf.
Witteman, M.F., van Woudenberg, J.G.J., Menarini, F. (2011). Defeating
RSA multiply-always and message blinding countermeasures. In CT-
RSA 2011, Kiayias, A. (ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Woodruff, D.P. and Zhou, S. (2022). Tight bounds for adversarially robust
streams and sliding windows via difference estimators. In 2021 IEEE
62nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS).
Denver.
OceanofPDF.com

10
Protected ECC Implementations
Łukasz CHMIELEWSKI1,2 and Louiza
PAPACHRISTODOULOU3
1Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands
2Masaryk University, Czechia
3Fontys University of Applied Sciences, Eindhoven, Netherlands
10.1. Introduction
This chapter considers various techniques for protecting implementations
based on elliptic curve cryptosystems against side-channel and fault
injection attacks.
Elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) is broadly used in security products for
digital signatures (ECDSA) and for the establishment of a common secret
key (ECDH). Sometimes, ECC is also used for encryption (EC-ElGamal),
but this is not common, since symmetric algorithms are much faster. ECC
consists of algorithms and protocols with small key lengths and memory
requirements compared to equivalent RSA implementations. Therefore,
ECC offers suitable implementation options for embedded devices, where
the resources in terms of memory and power are limited. The security of
elliptic curve cryptosystems relies on the difficulty of solving the discrete
logarithm problem on elliptic curves defined over finite fields of large
characteristic or binary fields. The focus, from a security point of view, is
on scalar multiplication because this is the operation that involves the
manipulation of the secret in an ECC protocol. For digital signature
protocols using elliptic curves, there are also other operations that need to
be protected. Essentially, all values that allow the private key recovery need
to be protected. For instance, not only does the scalar multiplication need to
be protected but also modular multiplication involves the private key. We
do not discuss this topic in this chapter since this operation can be protected
with multiplicative masking, which is not specific to ECC. Another
example is generating the cryptographically secure and random scalar

nonce used in ECDSA signature generation; this number can be random or
deterministic but must be unique for every signature, otherwise a nonce
leakage attack can lead to signature forgery1.
There are various ways to implement ECC algorithms in a secure way in
embedded devices, and in principle, the following techniques are used:
constant time and/or regular scalar multiplication algorithm;
masked (or blinded) implementations;
randomization of scalar and/or point coordinates.
In real-world applications that require security against SCA, for example,
payment, these techniques are used, but are not always implemented
correctly, making the end product vulnerable to various types of
implementation attacks, such as simple power analysis (SPA), differential
power analysis (DPA), template attacks (TA) and fault analysis (FA)2.
In the rest of this chapter, we analyze five techniques and provide
algorithmic countermeasures, in a step-by-step, incremental approach. We
start with the most basic countermeasures that protect against SPA in
sections 10.2.1 and 10.2.2. We move to countermeasures that protect against
DPA and TA in sections 10.2.3 and 10.2.4 and then we present protected
algorithms against more sophisticated attacks, such as the conditional swap
(see section 10.2.6.1) and address-bit side-channel attacks (see section
10.2.6).
The aforementioned side-channel techniques are described in Part 1 and 2.
In particular, the unsupervised approaches, such as SPA and DPA, are
described in Chapter 4, while the supervised approaches, such as TA, are
described in Chapter 5. Even more advanced attacks, mostly supervised
ones, are covered in Chapter 7.
Part 3 covers fault injection and FA. In particular, generic fault injection
techniques are described in Chapter 9. The FA on public key cryptographic
algorithms, including ECC, is described in Chapter 11 and advanced fault
injection attacks are described in Chapter 12.

10.2. Protecting ECC implementations and
countermeasures
In this section, we give a step-by-step approach of how to develop a secure
ECC implementation against SCA and FA. The methodology and
countermeasures described here can be followed in order to derive a
protected ECC implementation.
First of all, we start with the selection of a curve that is approved by several
standards for use in ECC.
Organization and practical examples
In this section, we also present practical examples for described
countermeasures. The examples come from a library available at the
following open-access repository: https://github.com/sca-secure-library-
sca25519/sca25519. This repository contains a library that provides three
implementations computing the X25519 key-exchange protocol on the
ARM Cortex-M4 micro-controller; their functionalities are equivalent, but
differ in the degree of the employed side-channel and fault injection
countermeasures.
We distinguish between unprotected X25519 (called STM32F407-
unprotected in the repository), X25519 with ephemeral keys (called
STM32F407-ephemeral) and X25519 with static keys (called STM32F407-
static). The unprotected implementation includes only basic
countermeasures (e.g. constant time operations), while the ephemeral
implementation increases the number of countermeasures to protect the
ephemeral key. The static implementation adds further countermeasures to
protect the static key since it can be used multiple times, contrary to the
ephemeral case. As expected, the extra security comes at the cost of
computational overhead.
10.2.1. Unified arithmetic and complete formulae
Elliptic curves used in cryptography must use unified and complete
formulae without exceptional cases for protection against several types of
attacks and in particular, SCA. An elliptic curve addition law is complete if
it correctly computes the sum of any two points in the group without

exceptions. The addition law is unified if the addition and doubling of
points can be computed by the same formulae.
Weierstrass curves are widely used in cryptography and they are
standardized by several organizations. However, they had a main drawback
regarding their side channel resistance; namely, their addition formulae
were incomplete and not unified. Since 2016, there have been complete
addition formulae for prime order elliptic curves defined over a finite field
 with q ≥ 5 (
 is a finite field of q elements,
where q is a power of a prime number p), which is an important step toward
SCA resistance of Weierstrass curves.
Edwards curves were the first curves shown to have a complete addition
law. The completeness property of the addition law offers the possibility to
secure ECC implementations against attacks that take advantage of the
different patterns between addition and multiplication, such as TA, for
example. By removing the “branching” to handle exceptional cases, some
side-channel attack vulnerabilities caused by handling these cases can be
prevented. It is trickier, but still possible, to also achieve secure ECC
implementations without complete addition formulae, but the difference
between addition and doubling operations should be handled carefully. The
way the multiplication is handled in the underlying field operations, and
more specifically the handling of carries, can cause side-channel leakages
that can be exploited by, for example, carry-based attacks.
Example
The arithmetic employed in the repository uses unified and complete
formulae on Curve25519. For all three implementations, the code
implementing this arithmetic is located in the crypto/numerics folder and in
the curve25519_ladderstep function in the
crypto/scalarmult/scalarmult_25519.c file. Since we concentrate on
describing the countermeasures here, we do not delve into the details of that
arithmetic implementation. For more details on how arithmetic is used, we
refer the reader to the example in section 10.2.3.
10.2.2. Constant-time scalar multiplication
As previously mentioned, scalar multiplication is the most critical operation
in ECC implementations, since it manipulates the secret key. The

straightforward implementation of scalar multiplication on an elliptic curve
involves repeated doubling and addition operations, which is known as the
double-and-add algorithm. When the bit of the scalar is 0, a doubling is
performed, and when the bit is 1, a doubling is followed by an addition.
Algorithm 10.1. Left-to-right double-and-add algorithm
This is an efficient algorithm since it performs the addition only if the
current bit is 1; otherwise, it performs only one doubling. However, it is
vulnerable to SPA since distinct patterns can be exploited in the execution
of the algorithm. In a non-protected implementation like Algorithm 10.1,
the sequence of point additions and point doublings can reveal the bits of
the secret scalar k. When two operations are performed, this is obvious in a

single power analysis leakage trace, and in this way, we can recover the
current bit in each round of the computation.
Protecting this algorithm from SPA leakage can be done in two ways. The
first approach is called atomicity, in which individual operations are
implemented in such a way that they have an identical side-channel profile
(e.g. for any branch and any key-bit related subroutine). In particular, both
operations (doubling and addition) should not be recognizable from each
other, using for example, unified formulae. However, this approach has a
serious drawback: the amount of ones in the scalar simply leaks in timing.
The second, in our opinion more secure approach, requires making the point
operations independent of the secret key. Making this algorithm regular can
be done by avoiding the if-then statement and performing a dummy group
addition, when the current bit ki is 0. Line 4 can be replaced by
 as seen in Algorithm 10.2. However, in this
way, the algorithm becomes vulnerable to fault attacks. If the attacker is
able to induce a fault during the evaluation of 
,
they will be able to understand if the current bit is 0, since in that case the
evaluation R1 + P is written in register R1 ; and as this register is not
needed, the final output of the algorithm will not be affected. Therefore, the
algorithm is vulnerable to a fault injection attack called safe-error attack.

Algorithm 10.2. Left-to-right double-and-always-add
algorithm
Example
The scalar multiplication algorithm is implemented constant-time for the
unprotected implementation in the crypto/scalarmult/scalarmult_25519.c
file in the function crypto_scalarmult_curve25519 3. We describe this
algorithm in detail in the example in section 10.2.3.
10.2.3. Elimination of if-statements even dummy ones
As explained previously, eliminating if-statements can protect against SPA
attacks, but using dummy operations in an algorithm can make it still
vulnerable to FA attacks. Therefore, we need a regular algorithm that also
does not have dummy operations. The double-and-add-always algorithm
was initially proposed as a first attempt to avoid if-statements and therefore
prevent the identification of different operations. The algorithm performs a
point doubling, followed by a point addition in a for-loop, scanning the
scalar bits from the most significant to the least significant one. Both

operations are performed in every loop iteration and according to the key
bit, the final assignment to R0 will be either R0 or R1. There are no
conditional statements in the algorithm, but there is one key-dependent
assignment, which can leak secret information either with DPA or with TA.
Another important remark is that R0 is initialized by P instead of 
, in
order to avoid exceptional cases given by the point at infinity. When this is
used, the MSB of the scalar is considered to be equal to 1 and the for-loop
needs to start from n − 2.
Algorithm 10.3. Left-to-right double-and-add-always
algorithm (Coron 1999)
The Montgomery Power Ladder (MPL) is one of the most secure
algorithms, since it is not only protected against simple side-channel
analysis due to its natural regularity of operations, but it is also protected
against safe-error attacks since there are no dummy operations. This

algorithm is used as the primary secure and efficient choice for resource-
constrained devices. The MPL is described in Algorithm 10.4. The
regularity of the algorithm makes it intrinsically secure against a large
variety of implementation attacks (SPA, some fault attacks, etc.).
Furthermore, for the sake of efficiency, often the ECC operations in the
ladder step, the addition and the doubling, are combined into a single
operation on the curve.
Algorithm 10.4. The Montgomery Ladder
Combining the above-mentioned regular algorithms with scalar and/or point
randomization make ECC implementations secure against various types of
attacks. Therefore, in the next sections, we will provide a description of
these techniques.

Example
Our example protected ECC library, which implements the X25519 elliptic-
curve key exchange, is based on arithmetic on the elliptic curve in
Montgomery form E : y2 = x3 + 486, 662x2 + x over the finite field 
 with
p = 2255 − 19. This is essentially a specific version of the Algorithm 10.4
oriented at efficiency and that assures constant-timeness.
The group of 
-rational points on E has order 8 · ℓ, where ℓ is a 252-bit
prime. The central operation is scalar multiplication smult (k, xP), which
receives as input two 32-byte arrays k and xP. Each of those arrays is
interpreted as a 256-bit integer in little-endian encoding; the integer xP is
further interpreted as an element of 
. The smult routine first sets the most
significant bit of xP to zero (ensuring that xP ∈ {0, … , 2255 − 1}) and sets
the least significant 3 bits of k and the most significant bit of k to zero, and
the second-most significant bit of k to one (ensuring that k ∈ 8 · {2251,…,
2252 − 1}). This operation on bits of the input k is often referred to as
“clamping”; in our pseudo-code, we denote it by clamp. Subsequently,
smult outputs the x-coordinate x[k]P of the point [k]P, where P is one of the
two points with x-coordinate xP on E (if there are such points) or the
quadratic twist of E (otherwise), and where [k] denotes scalar multiplication
by k. The smult operation is commonly implemented using the Montgomery
Ladder and a projective representation (X : Z) of an x-coordinate x = X/Y.
Pseudocode for this ladder is given in Algorithm 10.5 and is implemented in
the crypto/scalarmult/scalarmult_25519.c file in the function
crypto_scalarmult_curve25519 for the unprotected implementation.

[10.1]
[10.2]
[10.3]
Algorithm 10.5.
The Montgomery Ladder for x-coordinate-based X25519 scalar
multiplication on E : y2 = x3 + 486662x2 + x
This algorithm uses two sub-routines cswap and ladderstep. The cswap
(“conditional swap”) routine swaps the first two inputs if and only if the last
input is 1. For two 32-bit values v1 and v2 and the condition bit s, cswap is
usually implemented in the following three ways:
or:
For the unprotected implementation, the cswap routine is implemented
using the last method (from equation [10.3]) in the

crypto/numerics/fe25519.c file in the fe25519_cswap function. The C code
implementing this function is presented in Listing 10.14.
Listing 10.1. fe25519_cswap function
As shown in the listing, the fe25519_cswap function uses only arithmetic
operations to swap the coordinates. This way, the implementation achieves
constant time and eliminates if-statements. Moreover, due to the use of the
Montgomery Ladder, dummy operations are not used.
Note that the Montgomery Ladder can be implemented also using scalar-
dependent memory access like in Algorithm 10.4. The problem with that
approach is that memory accesses might not be constant time if the targeted
platform includes, for example, caches.
For the ephemeral static implementation, we use a randomized version of
cswap called cswaprr, which provides an extra ladder state randomization
(for details on that function, please see the example in section 10.2.5).
The ladderstep computes (X[2]P, Z[2]P, XP+q, ZP+Q) on input coordinates
XQ−P, XP, ZP, XQ, ZQ. It is implemented in the curve25519_ladderstep
function in the crypto/scalarmult/scalarmult_25519.c file for all three
implementations. Since we concentrate on the countermeasures, we do not
delve here into the details of that arithmetic implementation.

The key-exchange protocol uses the smult function and the fixed basepoint
xB = [9, 0, … , 0] and proceeds with straightforward elliptic-curve Diffie–
Hellman.
10.2.4. Scalar randomization
The correlation between the power consumption/EM emanations and the
instructions or the data that are manipulated during the cryptographic
operation can be thwarted by randomizing the secret key bits. In the case of
ECC implementations, randomization is possible either for the scalar or for
the coordinates of the point on the curve, which are involved in the crucial
computation of the scalar multiplication5.
Randomizing the scalar results in getting traces with [k′]P instead of [k]P,
with k′ the randomized scalar defined for many different cases below. The
randomizations of the scalar are always done modulo q, which is the order
of the curve. The different techniques for scalar randomization are:
1. [k]P = [k − r]P + [r]P, two scalar multiplications are computed Q = [k
− r]P and R = [r]P;
2. [k]P = [r]([k × r−1]P), two scalar multiplications are computed Q = [k
× r−1]P and R = [r]Q;
3. 
, three scalar
multiplications are computed Q = [k mod r]P, R = [r]P and
;
4. [k]P = [k]P + [rq]P, where q is the order of the curve and k + rq is the
randomized scalar. Thus, 
 the neutral element on .
Scalar randomization is an effective countermeasure against certain types of
attacks, such as SPA, DPA and TA. However, single-trace SPA and template
attacks are still possible against ECC implementations protected only with
this countermeasure. The important property that thwarts scalar
randomization is the fact that we need only one target trace, which is taken
using the same randomized k′ that is manipulated throughout the attack. For
the template traces, we always need the first part of the trace, which
corresponds to the beginning of the scalar multiplication algorithm running

with input point a multiple m of P. This part of the trace is not affected by
scalar randomization.
For scalar multiplication over certain cryptographic elliptic curves, typically
those over a prime field 
 where p is a generalized Mersenne number,
adding a random multiple of the group order does not hide all the bits of
scalar k because the group order q is relatively close to the power of two. In
such cases, multiplying random r by q works more like a left binary shift
and if the size of r is significantly smaller than q (e.g. q is 512 bits and r is
64 bits), then not all bits of the scalar k are blinded.
For all these four randomization techniques mentioned above, a type of
SCA called online template attacks (OTA) can be applied. Roughly
speaking, OTA works as follows: the attacker first collects a single trace, a
so-called target trace. The goal is to recover the scalar iteratively from the
target trace, starting from the first iteration and going to the last. Second,
the attacker obtains traces with carefully crafted inputs, so-called (online)
template traces, in order to find similarities with the first iteration of the
target trace. By carefully analyzing such similarities, the attacker recovers
the first scalar bit. Based on that, the attacker collects new template traces
targeting the next iteration and the attack continues until all scalar bits are
recovered. The OTA works against all scalar randomization techniques
because it simply requires one target trace and the original scalar can be
recovered from the randomized ones. The interested reader can find more
references about OTA in the notes at the end of the chapter.
Remark on the size of the randomness
For all the randomizations and blindings in this chapter, the natural question
is how many bits of entropy they need to have. It is comfortable to think
that r is just a random element in the given group but that is too inefficient.
In usual practice, it is assumed that the entropy should be big enough so
brute-force is not possible. Therefore, as also presented in the example
below, it is commonly assumed that 64-bit per one randomization or
blinding should be sufficient. Unless stated otherwise, this also applies to
the other form of randomizations described in this chapter, including
coordinate and point randomizations, among others.
Observe that, as mentioned above, scalar randomization 4 requires more
entropy to be secure.

Example
Scalar randomizations are only implemented for the static implementation6.
In particular, the aforementioned multiplicative scalar multiplication [2]
[k]P = [r]([k × r−1]P), where r is a 64-bit random value, is implemented to
protect the execution of the scalar multiplication. The function first
generates random r and then computes r−1, Q = [k × r−1]P, and R = [r]Q.
However, this is not the only scalar randomization included in the static
implementation. The scalar in the static library is also protected with static
masks, including a blinding factor; there are other masks too and they are
described in the example in section 10.2.5. It means that the scalar is not
stored in plaintext and the masked scalar is stored together with the blinding
factor. Then the blinded scalar and the blinding are automatically updated
during scalar-multiplication executions and they should not be modified (or
accessed) by the user before the next execution7. This static blinding is
performed in the following way: a 64-bit blinding factor f and a blinded
scalar 
, such that 
, are stored together.
Both of these countermeasures are implemented in the function
crypto_scalarmult_curve25519. Note that the scalar k is never accessed in
plaintext. The masking f−1 is removed from 
 only after it is multiplied
by 
. Moreover, inversions of r and the
blinding factor are masked multiplicatively8 to protect the scalar r used in
the second scalar multiplication. An example of such an operation is
computing the inverse of r. Finally, the static blinding of the scalar is
updated with new random values after the scalar multiplications are
finished in crypto_scalarmult_curve25519 by calling the function
update_static_key_curve25519. This function first updates the masks that
are mentioned in the next section and then performs the following:
1. generates new blinding factor nB and computes nB−1 in a
multiplicatively masked way;
2. computes 
;
3. computes 
 and stores 
 and
nB as a new blinded scalar to be used in the next scalar multiplication.

This way, the scalar k even if it is used multiple times is never accessed in
the same way multiple times. This countermeasure heavily hinders attacks
oriented on key transfer.
10.2.5. Coordinate and point randomizations
For ECC implementations, the choice of point representation is very
crucial, as it is shown that it can reveal information about the underlying
discrete logarithms. More precisely, it is shown that projective coordinates
leak when applied, for example, at Schnorr Signatures, by recovering a few
bits of the scalar k at each iteration9.
Randomizing the point representation of the scalar multiplication state is
commonly done by either coordinate or point randomization. Randomizing
the homogeneous projective coordinates involves choosing a random
number λ and replacing (X, Y, Z) with λX, λY, λZ. In this way, the leaking of
additional information can be prevented. Since usually Z = 1, this
randomization costs only two finite field multiplications. The Jacobian
representation can be randomized similarly: it consists of selecting a
random r in the finite field 
, and computing: (X, Y, Z) ↦ (r2 × X, r3 × Y, r
× Z). In most cases, the input point is in affine coordinates and Z = 1, so the
randomization of the point is reduced to: (x, y) ↦ (r2 × x, r3 × y, r). The
supplementary cost of this countermeasure is four finite field
multiplications. For comparison, the cost of one scalar multiplication using
a 256-bit scalar with a regular algorithm such as double-and-add-always is
5,100 multiplications.
As shown above, coordinate randomization is efficient. However, it has a
drawback: while the non-zero coordinates are randomized, the 0 values
remain unchanged. This leakage can be used by so-called zero-value
attacks. This problem is avoided by randomizing the point on the curve: the
idea is that before the scalar multiplication, we add a random blinding point
to the input point, and then perform the scalar multiplication with the new
input. Then, the scalar multiplication is performed a second time with the
blinding random point as the input, and finally, the result is subtracted from
the result of the first multiplication. This way, the result is correct and the
execution is randomized at a twofold cost; how to perform point

randomization in a more efficient way is described below in the example
section.
The aforementioned countermeasures work well against TA (including
OTA) since they do not allow for the prediction of intermediate values of
the calculation and prevent the construction of template traces in a
deterministic way. Coordinate blinding is implemented in some
cryptographic libraries, like MbedTLS10, and it should be used when the
device under attack has a random generator.
Example
Since the scalar multiplication in the library uses the (X, Z) representation,
the ephemeral and the static implementation fully randomize the Z
coordinate before the Montgomery Ladder is executed. This is done in the
function crypto_scalarmult_curve25519.
Additionally, re-randomizing the projective representation in the cswaprr
procedure is implemented. The strategy of cswaprr, which merges
conditional swaps with projective re-randomization, takes into account that
memory access leaks significantly more than register operations. Therefore,
the ephemeral and the static implementations fetch input words from
memory, conditionally swap and randomize in registers and then store the
results back. Randomization here means multiplying both the X and the Z
coordinate by a 29-bit random value. This is implemented in the assembly
in the procedure cSwapAndRandomize_asm in the file
crypto/asm/cortex_m4_cSwapAndRandomize.S. This re-randomization
protects the implementations against cross-correlation attacks.
Furthermore, to protect against attacks that use special points as input, the
static implementation use static random points R and S for input point
blinding, where S = [−k] R. Initially, R is added to the input point and after
scalar multiplication ladders, S is added to the result. This is implemented in
crypto_scalarmult_curve25519 for the static implementation. The points R
and S are always securely re-randomized at the end of scalar multiplication
(together with the blinded scalar; see section 10.2.4 for details) in the
function update_static_key_curve25519. They should also be stored
securely.

10.2.6. Protection against address-bit side-channel
attacks
Address-bit side-channel attacks, and the specific countermeasures, have
received relatively little attention in the literature since blinding methods
typically randomize the bitwise representation of a scalar, and therefore the
accessed addresses. However, only randomizing the scalar does not remove
the address-bit leakage and does not prevent single-trace attacks: the
attacker can still perform a single-trace attack to recover the randomized
scalar and then re-compute the original secret. This is even more important
since, as mentioned before, for scalar multiplication over certain
cryptographic elliptic curves adding a random multiple of the group order
does not hide all the bits of scalar k. In this section, we investigate the
countermeasure that makes such a single-trace attack harder or even
impossible. We do not present them in section 10.2.4 since this method can
be either combined or added on top of any scalar randomization.
A typical countermeasure against side-channel attacks consists of masking
the intermediate values with a random number. In symmetric cryptographic
algorithms, Boolean shares of the secret are typically used, whether in
asymmetric algorithms, the secret exponent/scalar is masked using group
arithmetic properties. This section presents a recent scalar splitting
technique with minimal impact on performance based on Boolean shares,
analogous to the countermeasures that we would use for an implementation
of a block cipher and similar to the countermeasures used to prevent
address-bit side-channel attacks. More precisely, Algorithm 10.6 shows how
an exponent can be efficiently split into two shares, where the exponent is
the exclusive OR (XOR) sum of the two shares, typically requiring only an
extra register and a few registers copies per bit. Scalar multiplication
algorithms can be randomized for every execution and combined with other
blinding techniques, maintaining at the same time the regularity feature. In
this way, both the scalar and the intermediate values can be protected
against a broad range of side-channel attacks.
Algorithm 10.6 shows how the MPL can be implemented with the XOR-
split scalar during a scalar multiplication on a curve . Initially, we split the
scalar κ into two Boolean shares A and B, which are n–bit integers, with n
equal to the scalar number bits. During the execution of the algorithm, one

share ai is used to indicate the address accessed, and the other acts as a
scalar. Whenever both values ai, bi appear in a computation, they are always
XOR-ed with a random value b′ so that there is no leakage of the current
scalar bit at any point of the implementation. This is shown in Line 6 of
Algorithm 10.6, where the assignment of the values is randomized
according to the random bit b′. This is the main point that prevents address-
bit side-channel attacks. This technique can be applied also in
exponentiation, in order to blind the secret exponent.
The main advantage of scalar multiplication (or exponentiation) algorithms
using this technique, is that the adversary needs a combination of leakages
to recover the scalar. For instance, a single trace attack targeting one
intermediate value would not be able to succeed, but a combination of TA
with a higher-order DPA might work. Of course, the corresponding
implementation should be done in a specific way, so that other leakages are
prevented. For instance, we need to make sure that during the computation
of 
 the operations happen in this order in the compiler and the
values ai, bi during the computation of ai ⊕ bi are never stored in a single
register together.
Algorithm 10.6. MPL with XOR-Split Scalar on an EC

10.2.6.1. Protection against attacks on conditional swap
Many software libraries implement MPL without the usage of memory-
dependent memory accesses to avoid timing leakage, which might happen
in the presence of, for example, caching. In such cases, usually the cswap is
used. However, the cswap was shown to leak the information about the
scalar bits, by employing for example TS. This leakage although data-based
is very similar to address-bit leakage and can be exploited in the same way.
Fortunately, the countermeasure from Algorithm 10.6 can be applied in this
context as well; the Montgomery Ladder from Algorithm 10.5 can be
protected with XOR-Split as presented in Algorithm 10.7. This
countermeasure adds additional random cswap executions to make the
cswap sequence in the scalar multiplication independent from the scalar
itself.
Algorithm 10.7. The Montgomery Ladder for X25519
with XOR-Split Scalar
Another approach for protecting cswap is to protect the operation itself. In
particular, equation [10.2] can be randomized in the following way to limit
dependence on the cswap condition bit s:

[10.4]
where r0 and r1 are random variables.
With equation [10.2], the result of the operation that manipulates the bit s
was 0 or a 32-bit input value. With the new implementation, 0 is never used
for multiplications and the leakage is avoided. The overhead due to the
countermeasure is negligible, but some small leakage is still present since
the plaintext bit s is accessed directly, even twice. Therefore, we conclude
that this countermeasure is not perfect, but the leakage is expected to be
significantly decreased.
Example
The example static implementation employs the countermeasure from
Algorithm 10.7 for the blinded scalar and the randomized value r.
10.2.7. Additional fault injection protections
The goal of a fault injections’ attacker against ECC is to learn the secret; in
the case of the key exchange, it is to learn the shared secret. This goal can
be achieved either by learning the secret scalar or by influencing the scalar
multiplication through fault injection during both key generation and
shared-key computation (and scalar multiplication is the main part of those)
to an easily guessable value.
Classical fault attacks on ECC aim at introducing faults in the scalar
multiplication computation to obtain faulty results. Then from the inputs,
the correct results, and these faulty results, the adversary is able to recover
information about the secret scalar based on the mathematical properties of
ECC. Observe that such attacks are thwarted by the combination of scalar
and point/coordinate randomizations, because then the relation between the
inputs and the faulty result is broken: the faulty results are not only
incorrect but also heavily randomized.
In this section, we describe additional fault injection countermeasures that
can be implemented, mostly to protect against fixing the shared secret to
predictable values. There are various generic fault injection protections that

should be considered, for example, redundancy. In the redundancy case,
security-relevant operations are implemented twice and their results are
compared. If there is a difference, then the execution stops; otherwise, it
continues. Additionally, the implementation can check the input and output
on the elliptic curve; however, this check on its own is not sufficient since it
does not stop safe-error attacks, even if we consider single-fault attacks.
In the example library of the ephemeral and static implementations, other
countermeasures against fault injection are implemented. First, the
implementation employs a flow-counter countermeasure: they use a single
counter monotonously incremented throughout the scalar multiplication to
detect changes in the execution flow. If the counter value does not match
the expected constant at the end of the computation, then we return a
random value. This countermeasure helps to protect against, for example,
loop-abort attacks. The second extra countermeasure is against an attacker
that aims to set the output of the scalar multiplication to a predictable value.
To stop that threat, the implementation initializes the output buffer with
random bytes, in order to make it impossible for the adversary to set the
output to a predictable value by skipping most of the operations using fault
injection.
10.3. Conclusion
In this chapter, we presented various techniques for protecting
implementations based on elliptic curve cryptographic schemes against
side-channel and fault injection attacks. We analyzed five techniques and
we provided algorithmic countermeasures, in a step-by-step, incremental
approach. We started with the most basic countermeasures that protect
against SPA and then we moved to countermeasures that protect against
DPA and TA. Finally, we presented protected algorithms against more
sophisticated attacks, such as conditional swap and address-bit side-channel
attacks.
10.4. Notes and further references
There are several survey papers and two relevant Ph.D. theses by
Chmielewski (2019) and Papachristodoulou (2019) analyzing efficient

countermeasures for ECC implementations. Abarzúa et al. (2019) analyze
the state-of-the-art of several proposals of algorithmic countermeasures to
prevent passive SCA on ECC defined over prime fields for applications on
embedded devices, which can be used in the Internet of Things. Fan and
Verbauwhede (2012) review the state of the art and various
countermeasures. Although this paper is from 2012, it is still a good starting
point for implementing protected ECC.
There are also other survey papers that can be checked (Fan et al. 2010;
Danger et al. 2013; Abarzúa et al. 2019). The German Federal Office for
Information Security (BSI) also published a document “ECC-guide:
Minimal Requirements for Evaluating Side-Channel attack resistance of
Elliptic Curve Implementations” by Feldhusen et al. (2016) that contains a
survey on SCA and FA attacks on ECC.
The example implementations used in this chapter come from the paper
“SoK:SCA-secure ECC in software – mission impossible?” by Batina et al.
(2022) and are accessible in an open-access repository11. The starting point
of these implementations is the library by Haase and Labrique (2019); the
main difference is that these implementations by Batina et al. (2021) add
many side-channel and fault injection countermeasures. The paper by
Batina et al. (2022) also includes an overview of side-channel and fault-
injection attacks on ECC scalar multiplication.
Section 10.1. Over the years, there have been many papers published
related to nonce leaks in ECDSA; an interesting attack using
Bleichenbacher’s solution to the hidden number problem to attack
nonce leaks in 384-Bit ECDSA is given by De Mulder et al. (2013). A
DPA attack against modular multiplication used in ECDSA is
presented in Hutter et al. (2009).
Section 10.2. There are several standards recommending how to use
elliptic curve cryptography in a secure way (ANSI 1998; Lochter et al.
2014; National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 2009;
BSI 2011). We can use ECC for digital signatures and for key
establishment schemes, and we must follow these standards since it is
critical to use secure implementations with stronger cryptography
requirements as we migrate to higher security strengths. An extensive

analysis of safe curves, fulfilling certain criteria, is given by Bernstein
and Lange (n.d.).
In FIPS 186-4, NIST recommends fifteen elliptic curves of varying
security levels for use in these elliptic curve cryptographic standards.
However, more than fifteen years have passed since these curves were
first developed, and the community now knows more about the
security of elliptic curve cryptography and practical implementation
issues. Advances within the cryptographic community have led to the
development of new elliptic curves and algorithms, whose designers
claim to offer better performance and are easier to implement in a
secure manner. An updated standard FIPS 186-5 by NIST proposes the
adoption of two new elliptic curves, Ed25519 and Ed448, for use with
EdDSA and the removal of the standard DSA for generating secure
signatures.
Section 10.2.1. Edwards (2007) introduced Edwards curves.
Applications of Edwards and twisted Edwards curves (Bernstein et al.
2008) in cryptography are extensively studied by Bernstein and Lange
(2007, 2009) and Hisil et al. (2008). The cost of addition and doubling
on Edwards curves depends on the form of the curve and the
coordinates chosen by the developer. An overview of all types of
curves and coordinates is given in the Explicit Formulas Database
(Bernstein and Lange n.d.).
Regarding the complete formulas for Weierstrass curves, we note here
that Bosma and Lenstra (1995) presented complete formulae for
Weierstrass curves, which had an exceptional case for the pair of
points (P, Q) if and only if P − Q is a point of order two. Renes et al.
(2016) presented complete addition formulae for prime order elliptic
curves 
 with q ≥ 5.
Fouque et al. (2008) introduced so-called carry-based attacks, which
are a type of SCA that do not attack the scalar multiplication itself but
its countermeasures. They rely on the carry propagation occurring
when long-integer additions are performed as repeated sub-word
additions.
Section 10.2.2. The observation about the vulnerability of the
algorithm to safe-error attacks was made by Joye (2007).

Side-channel atomicity is a countermeasure proposed by Chevallier-
Mames et al. (2003).
Section 10.2.3. The Montgomery Power Ladder is initially presented
by Montgomery (1987) as a way to speed up scalar multiplication on
elliptic curves. A comprehensive security analysis of the MPL, given
by Joye and Yen (2003), showed the regularity of this algorithm and its
protection against various side-channel attacks. For a specific choice
of projective coordinates, as described by Stam (2003), we can do
computations with only X and Z coordinates, which makes this option
more memory efficient than other algorithms.
Section 10.2.4. The double-and-add-always algorithm was initially
proposed by Coron (1999), who also proposed three countermeasures
that can prevent SCA and they are based on introducing random
numbers during the scalar multiplication Q = [k]P. Online TA are
presented by Batina et al. (2019), who showed that scalar
randomization is not an efficient countermeasure against this type of
attack.
Application of RNS to protecting ECC was presented by Fournaris et
al. (2017) and by Papachristodoulou et al. (2018).
Details about the insecurity of randomizing scalar by adding a random
multiple of the group order for elliptic curves with special group order
are presented by Schindler and Wiemers (2015). A more detailed
analysis of such scalar blinding, including an attack, even for elliptic
curves without a special group order is presented in Roche et al.
(2019).
Section 10.2.5. Point blinding and projective coordinate randomization
was proposed by Coron (1999) and coordinate re-randomization by
Nascimento et al. (2015). Naccache et al. (2004) showed that
projective coordinates leak, when applied at Schnorr Signatures, by
recovering a few bits of the scalar k at each iteration.
Section 10.2.6. Tunstall et al. (2021) presented the exponent/scalar
XOR-split countermeasure. In their work, 14 algorithms for the
exponent and scalar protection are presented and thoroughly analyzed.
They performed a security evaluation of those algorithms using

simulations based on the mutual information framework and formally
verified that they are secure against first-order attacks. The resistance
of the proposed algorithms against side-channel attacks is practically
verified with test vector leakage assessment (TVLA) by Goodwill et
al. (2011) performed on Xilinx’s Zynq zc702 evaluation board. A
security evaluation using the information-theoretic framework of
Standaert et al. (2009) is also performed. Examples of attacks on
randomized exponent/scalar include analyzing a single trace (from
SPA, Kocher et al. (1999) to collisions in manipulated values, Kim et
al. (2010); Witteman et al. (2011); Hanley et al. (2015)) or attempting
to find collisions in the random values used to then derive a (blinded)
exponent (Schindler and Itoh 2011). This countermeasure is
particularly important to prevent address-bit side-channel attacks
(Messerges et al. 1999; Itoh et al. 2002). The interested reader can also
refer to the PhD thesis by Papachristodoulou (2019) for a detailed
analysis of this technique.
Section 10.2.6.1. There were several attacks published against
conditional swaps, even if scalar and point randomization are enabled,
in particular, a template attack (Nascimento et al. 2016), a clustering
attack (Nascimento and Chmielewski 2017) and deep learning attacks
(Weissbart et al. 2020; Perin et al. 2021). Note that since both point
and scalar randomizations were used, all these approaches target single
traces during the attack and were shown to recover the whole scalar
with a few errors.
Section 10.2.7. An analysis of fault attacks applicability on ECC with
respect to side-channel countermeasures is presented by Batina et al.
(2022).
Various generic software fault injection (and side-channel)
countermeasures, including the flow-counter countermeasure, are
described by Witteman (2018). We refer an interested reader to that
work for generic countermeasures.
Attacks that insert faults with the aim of abruptly halting the normal
functionality of a cryptographic algorithm were proposed by Boneh et
al. (2001).

10.5. References
Abarzúa, R., Valencia, C., López, J. (2019). Survey for performance &
security problems of passive side-channel attacks countermeasures in
ECC. Report 2019/010, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available
at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/010.
ANSI (1998). ANSI-X9.62: Public key cryptography for the financial
services industry: The Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm
(ECDSA). Technical Report, American National Standards Institute.
Batina, L., Chmielewski, L., Papachristodoulou, L., Schwabe, P., Tunstall,
M. (2019). Online template attacks. Journal of Cryptographic
Engineering, 9(1), 21–36.
Batina, L., Chmielewski, L., Haase, B., Samwel, N., Schwabe, P. (2021).
SCA-secure ECC in software – Mission impossible? Report 2021/1003,
Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/1003.
Batina, L., Chmielewski, L., Haase, B., Samwel, N., Schwabe, P. (2022).
SoK: SCA-secure ECC in software – Mission impossible? IACR
Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems,
2023(1), 557–589.
Bernstein, D.J. and Lange, T. (n.d.). Explicit formulas database [Online].
Available at: http://www.hyperelliptic.org/EFD/.
Bernstein, D.J. and Lange, T. (2007). Faster addition and doubling on
elliptic curves. In ASIACRYPT 2007, Kurosawa, K. (ed.). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Bernstein, D.J. and Lange, T. (2009). A complete set of addition laws for
incomplete Edwards curves. Report 2009/580, Cryptology ePrint
Archive [Online]. Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2009/580.
Bernstein, D.J., Birkner, P., Joye, M., Lange, T., Peters, C. (2008). Twisted
Edwards curves. In AFRICACRYPT 08, Vaudenay, S. (ed.). Springer,
Heidelberg.

Boneh, D., DeMillo, R.A., Lipton, R.J. (2001). On the importance of
eliminating errors in cryptographic computations. Journal of Cryptology,
14(2), 101–119.
Bosma, W. and Lenstra, H.W. (1995). Complete systems of two addition
laws for elliptic curves. Journal of Number Theory, 53(2), 229 – 240.
BSI (2011). AIS46: Minimum requirements for evaluating side-channel
attack resistance of elliptic curve implementations. Technical Report,
Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik (BSI).
Chevallier-Mames, B., Ciet, M., Joye, M. (2003). Low-cost solutions for
preventing simple side-channel analysis: Side-channel atomicity. Report
2003/237, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2003/237.
Chmielewski, L. (2019). Exploiting horizontal leakage in public key
cryptosystems. PhD Thesis, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen.
Coron, J.-S. (1999). Resistance against differential power analysis for
elliptic curve cryptosystems. In CHES’99, Koç, Ç.K. and Paar, C. (eds).
Springer, Heidelberg.
Danger, J.-L., Guilley, S., Hoogvorst, P., Murdica, C., Naccache, D. (2013).
A synthesis of side-channel attacks on elliptic curve cryptography in
smart-cards. Journal of Cryptographic Engineering, 3(4), 241–265.
De Mulder, E., Hutter, M., Marson, M.E., Pearson, P. (2013). Using
Bleichenbacher’s solution to the hidden number problem to attack nonce
leaks in 384-bit ECDSA. In Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded
Systems – CHES 2013, Bertoni, G. and Coron, J.-S. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Edwards, H.M. (2007). A normal form for elliptic curves. In Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society, 44(3), 393–422 [Online]. Available at:
http://www.ams.org/journals/bull/2007-44-03/S0273-0979-07-01153-
6/home.html.
Fan, J. and Verbauwhede, I. (2012). An updated survey on secure ECC
implementations: Attacks, countermeasures and cost. In Cryptography

and Security: From Theory to Applications, Naccache, D. (ed.).
Springer, Heidelberg.
Fan, J., Guo, X., Mulder, E.D., Schaumont, P., Preneel, B., Verbauwhede, I.
(2010). State-of-the-art of secure ECC implementations: A survey on
known side-channel attacks and countermeasures. In 2010 IEEE
International Symposium on Hardware-Oriented Security and Trust
(HOST).
Feldhusen, D., Gebhardt, M., Illies, G., Kasper, M., Lochter, M., Petri, R.,
Stein, O., Thumser, W., Wicke, G. (2016). ECC-guide: Minimal
requirements for evaluating side-channel attack resistance of elliptic
curve implementations. Second draft, Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft.
Fouque, P.-A., Réal, D., Valette, F., Drissi, M. (2008). The carry leakage on
the randomized exponent countermeasure. In CHES 2008, Oswald E.
and Rohatgi, P. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Fournaris, A.P., Papachristodoulou, L., Sklavos, N. (2017). Secure and
efficient rns software implementation for elliptic curve cryptography. In
2017 IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops
(EuroS&PW), Paris.
Goodwill, G., Jun, B., Jaffe, J., Rohatgi, P. (2011). A testing methodology
for side-channel resistance validation. Non-Invasive Attack Testing
Workshop, NIST, Gaithersburg.
Haase, B. and Labrique, B. (2019). AuCPace: Efficient verifier-based PAKE
protocol tailored for the IIoT. IACR TCHES, 2019(2), 1–48.
Hanley, N., Kim, H., Tunstall, M. (2015). Exploiting collisions in addition
chain-based exponentiation algorithms using a single trace. In CT-RSA
2015, Nyberg, K. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Hisil, H., Wong, K.K.-H., Carter, G., Dawson, E. (2008). Twisted Edwards
curves revisited. In ASIACRYPT 2008, Pieprzyk, J. (ed.). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Hutter, M., Medwed, M., Hein, D., Wolkerstorfer, J. (2009). Attacking
ECDSA-enabled RFID devices. In ACNS 09, Abdalla, M., Pointcheval,

D., Fouque, P.-A., Vergnaud, D. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Itoh, K., Izu, T., Takenada, M. (2002). Address-bit differential power
analysis of cryptographic schemes OK-ECDH and OK-ECDSA. In
CHES 2002, Kaliski Jr., B.S. Koç, Ç.K., Paar, C. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Joye, M. (2007). Highly regular right-to-left algorithms for scalar
multiplication. In CHES 2007, Paillier, P. and Verbauwhede, I. (eds).
Springer, Heidelberg.
Joye, M. and Yen, S.-M. (2003). The Montgomery powering ladder. In
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems - CHES 2002, Kaliski
Jr., B.S., Koç, Ç.K., Paar, C. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Kim, H., Kim, T.H., Yoon, J.C., Hong, S. (2010). Practical second-order
correlation power analysis on the message blinding method and its novel
countermeasure for RSA. ETRI Journal, 32(1), 102–111.
Kocher, P.C., Jaffe, J., Jun, B. (1999). Differential power analysis. In
Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO’ 99, Wiener, M.J. (ed.). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Lochter, M., Merkle, J., Schmidt, J.-M., Shültze, T. (2014). Requirements
for standard elliptic curves [Online]. Available at: http://www.ecc-
brainpool.org/.
Messerges, T.S., Dabbish, E.A., Sloan, R.H. (1999). Power analysis attacks
of modular exponentiation in smartcards. In Cryptographic Hardware
and Embedded Systems, First International Workshop, CHES’99, Koç,
Ç.K. and Paar, C. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Montgomery, P.L. (1987). Speeding the Pollard and elliptic curve methods
of factorization. Mathematics of Computation, 48(177), 243–264.
Naccache, D., Smart, N.P., Stern, J. (2004). Projective coordinates leak. In
EUROCRYPT 2004, Cachin, C. and Camenisch, J. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Nascimento, E. and Chmielewski, L. (2017). Applying horizontal clustering
side-channel attacks on embedded ECC implementations. In Smart Card

Research and Advanced Applications, Eisenbarth, T. and Teglia, Y. (eds).
Springer, Cham.
Nascimento, E., López, J., Dahab, R. (2015). Efficient and secure elliptic
curve cryptography for 8-bit AVR microcontrollers. In Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Security, Privacy, and Applied
Cryptography Engineering. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-24126-5_17.
Nascimento, E., Chmielewski, L., Oswald, D., Schwabe, P. (2016).
Attacking embedded ECC implementations through CMOV side
channels. In SAC 2016, Avanzi, R. and Heys, H.M. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) (2009).
Recommended elliptic curves for federal government use. In Appendix
of FIPS 186-3 [Online]. Available at:
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips186-3/fips186-3.pdf.
Papachristodoulou, L. (2019). Masking curves: Side-channel attacks on
elliptic curve cryptography and countermeasures. Thesis, Radbooud
University, Nijmegen [Online]. Available at:
https://hdl.handle.net/2066/201163.
Papachristodoulou, L., Fournaris, A.P., Papagiannopoulos, K., Batina, L.
(2018). Practical evaluation of protected residue number system scalar
multiplication. IACR TCHES, 2019(1), 259–282.
Perin, G., Chmielewski, L., Batina, L., Picek, S. (2021). Keep it
unsupervised: Horizontal attacks meet deep learning. IACR TCHES,
2021(1), 343–372.
Renes, J., Costello, C., Batina, L. (2016). Complete addition formulas for
prime order elliptic curves. In EUROCRYPT 2016, Fischlin, M. and
Coron, J.-S. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Roche, T., Imbert, L., Lomné, V. (2019). Side-channel attacks on blinded
scalar multiplications revisited. Report 2019/1220, Cryptology ePrint
Archive [Online]. Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/1220.

Schindler, W. and Itoh, K. (2011). Exponent blinding does not always lift
(partial) SPA resistance to higher-level security. In ACNS 11, Lopez, J.
and Tsudik, G. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Schindler, W. and Wiemers, A. (2015). Efficient side-channel attacks on
scalar blinding on elliptic curves with special structure. NIST Workshop
on ECC Standards [Online]. Available at:
https://csrc.nist.gov/csrc/media/events/workshop-on-elliptic-curve-
cryptography-standards/documents/papers/session6-schindler-
werner.pdf.
Stam, M. (2003). On Montgomery-like representations for elliptic curves
over GF(2k). In Public Key Cryptography – PKC 2003: 6th
International Workshop on Practice and Theory in Public Key
Cryptography Miami, Desmedt, Y.G. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Standaert, F.-X., Malkin, T., Yung, M. (2009). A unified framework for the
analysis of side-channel key recovery attacks. In EUROCRYPT 2009,
Joux, A. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Tunstall, M., Papachristodoulou, L., Papagiannopoulos, K. (2021). Boolean
exponent splitting. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference
on Security and Cryptography, SECRYPT 2021, di Vimercati, S.D.C. and
Samarati, P. (eds). SCITEPRESS. doi: 10.5220/0010570903210332.
Weissbart, L., Chmielewski, L., Picek, S., Batina, L. (2020). Systematic
side-channel analysis of curve25519 with machine learning. Journal of
Hardware and Systems Security, 4, 1–15.
Witteman, M.F. (2018). Secure application programming in the presence of
side channel attacks, Riscure, Technical Report [Online]. Available at:
https://www.riscure.com/uploads/2018/11/201708RiscureWhitepaperSid
eChannelPatterns.pdf.
Witteman, M.F., van Woudenberg, J.G.J., Menarini, F. (2011). Defeating
RSA multiply-always and message blinding countermeasures. In CT-
RSA 2011, Kiayias, A. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.

Notes
1 Similarly to protecting modular multiplication, secure random generation
is out of the scope of this chapter.
2 The attacks based on fault analysis are also often called fault injection
attacks.
3 For the ephemeral and static implementations, the scalar multiplication is
additionally randomized and we will explain these randomizations later
on, when describing more complex countermeasures.
4 The code in the repository contains more newlines. In the listing, we
slightly compressed that code for the sake of presentation.
5 There are also other options for randomization, for instance, randomizing
the base field arithmetic by using the residue number system (RNS)
representation. In RNS, a number is represented as a set of smaller
numbers, where each one is the result of the modular reduction with a
smaller modulo basis; these modulo bases can be randomized to protect
against SCA and FA. RNS was shown to provide secure ECC
implementations, but we do not dive into details in this chapter.
6 The unprotected and ephemeral implementations do not include any scalar
randomizations.
7 The main idea is that if possible they should be stored in the memory
isolated from the user. However, such a feature is not offered by the
library platform.
8 Inversions can be masked multiplicatively in an easy way: a value to be
inverted is first multiplied by a new fresh mask m. Then, the inversion is
a computer and the result is multiplied by m. This way, the result is
correct but the power consumption is randomized.
9 The interested reader can find references in the notes at the end of the
chapter.
10 MbedTLS also implements scalar blinding.

11 Available at: https://github.com/sca-secure-library-sca25519/sca25519.
OceanofPDF.com

11
Post-Quantum Implementations
Matthias J. KANNWISCHER1, Ruben NIEDERHAGEN2,3,
Francisco RODRÍGUEZ-HENRÍQUEZ4 and Peter SCHWABE5,6
1Chelpis Quantum Corp, Taipei, Taiwan
2Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
3University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
4Cryptography Research Center, Technology Innovation Institute, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
5Max Planck Institute for Security and Privacy, Bochum, Germany
6Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands
11.1. Introduction
In this chapter, we give an overview of techniques for secure and efficient
implementation of so-called post-quantum cryptography, the anticipated
next generation of asymmetric cryptography. Today, most cryptographic
systems deployed in the real world use asymmetric primitives that rely on
the hardness of factoring (most notably RSA public-key encryption and
signatures), or the (elliptic-curve) discrete-logarithm problem (see Chapter
10 of this volume). While those systems, with suitably chosen parameters,
are believed to resist attacks by classical computers, it has been known
since Shor’s seminal 1994 paper, that a large universal quantum computer
will be able to solve both factoring and discrete logarithms in polynomial
time.
Luckily, even if a sufficiently large quantum computer becomes a reality,
this does not mean the end of efficient public-key cryptography. There exist
various approaches for constructing public-key encryption or key-
encapsulation mechanisms (KEMs) and signatures that – as far as we know
– resist attacks even by large universal quantum computers. There are five
main approaches to construct such post-quantum asymmetric schemes:

Problems related to finding short vectors in high-dimensional lattices
can be used to construct both efficient key-encapsulation schemes and
efficient signatures.
Hard problems in coding theory are mostly used to construct efficient
public-key encryption or key-encapsulation schemes.
The problem of solving large systems of multivariate quadratic
equations is mostly useful to construct signature schemes.
Cryptographic signatures can be built just from cryptographic hash
functions.
Finally, there are schemes based on the hardness of finding high-
degree isogenies between supersingular elliptic curves.
The first schemes of these families reach as far back as the 1970s and the
research field of post-quantum cryptography was explicitly established in
the early 2000s. However, research into post-quantum cryptography, in
particular concrete instantiations of schemes and implementations, received
a huge boost in early 2016, when the US-American National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) announced that they would launch an
effort of evaluating and eventually standardizing such schemes. NIST
issued a public call for proposals in late 2016 with a deadline for
submissions in November 2017.
At the time of writing this chapter, in early 2023, NIST’s post-quantum
project had just reached a major milestone with the announcement of the
first batch of algorithms NIST are planning to standardize: the lattice-based
signature schemes CRYSTALS-Dilithium and Falcon, the hash-based
signature scheme SPHINCS+, and the lattice-based key-encapsulation
mechanism CRYSTALS-Kyber. However, post-quantum schemes are still
far less well understood than the cryptographic schemes considered in the
other chapters of this book. The NIST standardization effort continued with
multiple KEMs forwarded to another round of evaluation and a renewed
call for signature proposals with a submission deadline in June 2023.
Consequently, the state of the art in scheme design, cryptanalysis, and
techniques for secure implementation is still very actively researched and
thus likely to change in the near future.

In order to provide a snapshot of the current state of the art, we take the
following approach: we pick one example scheme for lattice-based, one for
code-based, and one for isogeny-based key agreement and one example
scheme for lattice-based signatures, for multivariate signatures, and for
hash-based signatures. Where possible, we focus on schemes that are likely
to be relevant for real-world deployments, i.e. schemes that have been
selected by NIST for standardization, are still considered for standardization
in the NIST competition, or are going to be submitted to the upcoming on-
ramp for signatures. In our description of these schemes, we focus on the
essentials of the construction and aspects that are particularly relevant for
efficient and secure implementation. We omit details that are less relevant
here, for example, data serialization or compression routines. We provide
references to the full specifications at the end of this chapter.
In the sections explaining secure implementation techniques, we will
typically start by discussing “constant-time” implementations of the
respective primitive. We use this term to refer to (software)
implementations that systematically avoid data flow from secret inputs into
branch conditions, memory addresses, and variable-time arithmetic
instructions. Together, this ensures protection against classical timing
attacks, i.e. timing attacks against sequential execution of the program at a
fixed clock frequency. Systematic protection against more advanced
microarchitectural attacks that exploit, for example, transient execution or
data-dependent dynamic frequency scaling is still mostly unresolved, not
just for post-quantum cryptography.
11.2. Post-quantum encryption and key
encapsulation
Most current systems are using some variant of the Diffie–Hellman (DH)
protocol for key exchange and in some cases, with static keys, also for
authentication. The most common instantiation is elliptic-curve DH (see
Chapter 10 of this volume). We do not know any post-quantum scheme that
we could use as a drop-in replacement for DH, at least not without
massively impacting system performance. The abstract primitive that comes
closest to DH are KEMs. In many contexts, KEMs can be used to straight-

forwardly replace DH, and they have been used as a very flexible building
block in the construction of multiple post-quantum cryptographic protocols.
Consequently, most proposals aiming at post-quantum confidentiality build
a KEM; for scenarios where a public-key encryption (PKE) scheme is
needed, we can build such a PKE from a KEM efficiently and generically.
Most post-quantum KEMs are constructed by first building a passively
secure PKE scheme and then using a generic transform on top to obtain a
KEM that is secure against active, that is, chosen-ciphertext, attackers. We
thus first consider the construction of passively secure lattice-based PKEs
(section 11.2.1), code-based PKEs (section 11.2.2) and isogeny-based PKEs
(section 11.2.3), and then look into transforms to actively secure KEMs in
section 11.2.4.
11.2.1. Lattice-based KEMs – Kyber
Most lattice-based PKE schemes and KEMs are based on variants of the
learning-with-errors (LWE) or learning-with-rounding (LWR) problems.
The scheme that we are considering as an example in this section is the
NIST PQC finalist Kyber. As outlined above, in this section, we will focus
on a simplified version of the passively secure PKE underlying Kyber.
Kyber relies on the hardness of the module-learning-with-errors (MLWE)
problem. Consider the ring 
, where 
 is the
ring of integers modulo q and n is a positive integer; in the case of Kyber,
we have q = 3329 and n = 256. Consider further a positive integer k; in
Kyber, we have k ∈ {2, 3, 4}, depending on the security level. The search
version of the MLWE problem is to find 
, given samples (A, As +
e), where 
 is sampled uniformly at random and 
 is
sampled from a so-called noise distribution ψ. The decisional version of the
problem is to distinguish such samples from values (U, v), sampled
uniformly at random from 
. In the original definition of these
problems, also s was assumed to be sampled uniformly at random, but later
results showed that the problem remains hard if s is sampled from other
distributions, most importantly, if s is sampled from the noise distribution
ψ.

The noise distribution outputs “small” values in 
 centered around zero.
For example, in Kyber, the noise distribution is generating polynomial
coefficients in 
 from the set {−η, …, η}. More concretely, each
coefficient c is obtained from a centered binomial distribution as
 for bits ai, bi that are the output of a PRF, that is,
that are assumed to be indistinguishable from uniformly random bits. Most
parameter sets of Kyber use the parameter η = 2.
11.2.1.1. Scheme definition
Let us take a closer look at a simplified version of the public-key encryption
scheme underlying Kyber. We will omit details about encoding and
decoding of keys and the ciphertext. Note, however, that the complete
picture involves lossy compression of the ciphertext.
Key generation of the PKE underlying Kyber consists of the following
steps:
1. Sample a public 32-byte string ρ uniformly at random.
2. Sample a secret 32-byte string σ uniformly at random.
3. Expand ρ through an extendable output function (XOF) and run
rejection sampling on the output to obtain a matrix 
 that
“looks uniformly random”.
4. Use the output of a PRF with key σ to obtain 
 and
 with coefficients from the noise distribution (see above).
5. Compute t = As + e.
6. Return secret key sk = s and public key (t, ρ).
Encryption takes as input a public key pk = (t, ρ), a 32-byte message m, and
a 32-byte string r of random coins. It then proceeds as follows:
1. Expand ρ to obtain the same matrix A that was generated in key
generation.

2. Use the output of a PRF with key r to obtain 
, 
,
and 
 with coefficients from the noise distribution (see
above).
3. Compute u = ATr + e1.
4. Compute v = tTr + e2 + MapToPoly(m).
5. Return ciphertext c = (u, v).
In this encryption routine, the MapToPoly function maps each bit of the
message m to one coefficient of a polynomial in 
. A zero bit is mapped
to 0; a one bit is mapped to ⌈q/2⌉.
Decryption takes as input a ciphertext c = (u, v) and a secret key s and
recovers a message m′ as m′ = MapFromPoly(v − sTu). Here, the
MapFromPoly function maps each coefficient of a polynomial in 
 to a
single bit; a full polynomial is thus mapped to a string of 256 bits or 32
bytes. A coefficient in 
 is mapped to 1, if it is in {⌈q/4⌉, …, ⌊3q/4⌋},
otherwise it is mapped to 0.
With very high probability, decryption will succeed and recover the original
message, that is, m′ = m. Let us understand why this is the case: During
encryption we add tTr + e2 to MapToPoly(m) to obtain v. In decryption we
subtract sTu from v and use MapFromPoly to obtain m′. The difference of
the two terms is:
As all the coefficients in s, r, e, e1, and e2 are small and centered around
zero, the coefficients of the difference are also expected to be relatively
small. This means that MapFromPoly in decryption receives as input a

noisy version of the output of MapToPoly in encryption; as long as this
noise has all coefficients smaller than ⌊q/4⌋, decryption will succeed.
11.2.1.2. Techniques for efficient implementation
The core operation of Kyber as well as for most other lattice-based KEMs is
polynomial multiplication. Specifically, Kyber requires us to multiply
polynomials in 
. Kyber’s ring is chosen in a
way that allows fast polynomial multiplication using the number-theoretic
transform (NTT). The idea of NTT-based polynomial multiplication is to
transform the inputs into a different domain (called “NTT domain” or
“frequency domain”) in which multiplication is cheap (i.e. has linear
complexity). The result is then transformed back to “normal domain” (or
“time domain”). To obtain the product ab with 
, we compute:
where NTT and NTT−1 are the transformations to and from NTT domain,
and ∘ is the multiplication in NTT domain. These transformations are
particularly fast for power-of-two n. At the core of any (radix-2), NTT is the
following ring isomorphism:
It allows us to split a polynomial 
 into two
half-sized polynomials modulo Xn + c and modulo Xn − c. The inverse can
be computed by applying the Chinese remainder theorem on the two
elements in 
 and 
 to obtain the
element in 
. In the case of 
, this only works if a c
exists, such that 1 ≡ − c2 mod q, that is, we require a fourth primitive root of
unity. Note that both the splitting and re-combining only requires us to work
on two coefficients of the inputs at a time, which is commonly referred to as
a butterfly operation. Both the forward and the inverse transformations

require n/2 multiplications by c (or c−1/2), n/2 additions and n/2
subtractions. Note that since straightforward polynomial multiplications
requires n2 multiplications, the multiplication of half-sized polynomials is
about four times faster than multiplication of full-sized polynomials. Hence,
the splitting does result in a net speed-up for larger n. For smaller n (e.g. n =
2), the additions and subtractions outweigh the performance improvement.
This trick can be applied recursively to further split the resulting
polynomials into halves. However, it requires the existence of the
corresponding roots of unity. The splitting is usually referred to as an NTT
layer. For a k-layer NTT starting from 
, one requires a 2k+1-th primitive
root of unity. In case one splits all the way down to degree-0 polynomials, it
is called a “complete” NTT, otherwise it is called an “incomplete” NTT. In
case of a complete NTT, ∘ becomes a coefficient-wise (or point-wise)
multiplication of the inputs. In case of an incomplete NTT, ∘ multiplies 2k
polynomials with n/2k coefficients. ∘ is usually referred to as base
multiplication in this case. For the Kyber 
, a complete NTT would
require a 512-th primitive root of unity which does not exist modulo q =
3329. Hence, Kyber uses an incomplete seven-layer NTT.
Due to the use of NTTs, Kyber is particularly suitable for vectorized
implementations (e.g. using AVX2 or Arm Neon). In each NTT layer, each
coefficient is used in exactly one butterfly with one other coefficient. By
loading multiple coefficients into one vector register, we can compute
multiple butterflies in parallel. This works straightforwardly while
polynomials have more coefficients than fit into one register, that is, in the
first NTT layers. Once polynomials are split into polynomials of smaller
size, we have to shuffle the registers, such that the coefficients involved in
one butterfly are in separate registers.
For implementing the modular coefficient multiplications within the NTT, a
commonly used technique is Montgomery multiplication. Montgomery’s
reduction approach is to replace expensive division by odd q with a cheap
division by a power of two R =2l. Assume we have computed the product c
= ab of two coefficients. When reducing a value c (< qR), which
coincidentally is a multiple of R > q, we can simply store c/R which reduces
the size of c by l bits and is cheaply computed. Montgomery’s idea is to
make sure that c is a multiple of R by introducing a correction step, that is,

we want to find a value t, such that c − tq is divisible by R. Montgomery
computes t as cq−1 mod R, such that c − aq−1 q mod R = 0. Note that the
result of the reduction is then abR−1 mod q. To obtain the correct result, we
have to multiply by R again (or by R2 mod q when using Montgomery
multiplication). If one of the multiplicands is a constant, we may pre-
compute aR mod q. The result of the Montgomery multiplication is then
abRR−1 ≡ ab mod q. This is commonly used in the NTT.
It is important to note that while polynomial arithmetic accounts for a large
fraction of the Kyber run-time, another building block is often even more
dominating: hashing based on the Keccak permutation (including both
SHA-3 and SHAKE). A hardware-accelerated Keccak implementation or,
alternatively, a heavily optimized Keccak software implementation vastly
benefits Kyber implementations. Due to the module structure, Kyber
implementations can make good use of vectorized Keccak implementations
running multiple permutations simultaneously (e.g. 4 for AVX2, or 2 for
Arm Neon).
11.2.1.3. Techniques for secure implementation
Kyber is very easy to implement following the constant-time paradigm. In
fact, the passively secure PKE underlying Kyber is designed in such a way
that even a straightforward implementation that simply follows the
specification will be free of secret-dependent branches and memory
addresses, as long as reductions modulo q do not employ any conditional
branches.
There are some common sub-routines in other lattice-based PKE schemes
and KEMs that require a bit more care for constant-time implementations.
Most notably, some schemes use noise from a fixed-weight distribution, for
example, polynomials with a fixed number of coefficients that are 1, a fixed
number of coefficients that are − 1, and all other entries equal to zero. The
standard way to sample a random polynomial satisfying this property is to
start with a fixed polynomial with the prescribed number of 1 and -1
coefficients and then randomly shuffle the coefficients. Performing this
random shuffling in constant time is not straightforward; standard
algorithms like Fisher–Yates shuffle are not constant time. Secure
implementations typically use permutation networks like the Benes network

or sorting networks like Batcher sort. Furthermore, some schemes involve
multiplication of a random polynomial by a polynomial s with coefficients
in {−1, 0, 1}. It is tempting to implement such a multiplication through a
sequence of conditional additions and subtractions, but straightforward
implementations of this approach will leak information about s.
To protect against side-channel attacks beyond timing attacks,
implementations of lattice-based KEMs typically use arithmetic masking,
that is, sharing each secret element s of 
 in d shares s0, …, sd−1, such that
 mod q. The core arithmetic operations are, from a masking
perspective, linear and thus very cheap to mask. Clearly, this is the case for
addition of noise polynomials. It also holds for matrix-vector
multiplications of the form As, because A is public and therefore unmasked.
What makes masking of lattice-based KEMs costly is switching between
Boolean masking used inside the PRF and arithmetic masking used for
arithmetic on polynomials over 
, and operations in the CCA transform
(see section 11.2.4).
Another generic side-channel countermeasure that has been implemented to
protect lattice-based PKE and KEMs is shuffling, that is, executing
operations in a randomized order. This is fairly easy and efficient to do for
polynomial addition, subtraction, compression and decompression by
processing coefficients in a randomized order. Also, the NTT can be
efficiently shuffled by randomizing the order of butterflies in each layer.
11.2.2. Code-based KEMs – Classic McEliece
Code-based cryptography is almost as old as RSA: it was introduced by
McEliece in 1978. The basic idea of code-based public key encryption
(PKE) schemes is to use a secret code  with a code length n and a code
rank k that can correct up to t errors as private key and its garbled generator
matrix 
 as public key. The sender encodes a message into a
binary vector 
 and encrypts it to the ciphertext 
 by
computing c = vG + e using an error vector 
 of weight t. The
receiver uses the secret code  to obtain vG = c − e by correcting the t bit
errors and decodes vG back to v.

A dual-variant to the McEliece cryptosystem was proposed by Niederreiter
(1986). Instead of a generator matrix G, he uses a parity-check matrix
 as public key. The sender then encodes the message as
error vector 
 and encrypts it to a ciphertext 
 as
syndrome c = He. As in the McEliece cryptosystem, the receiver uses the
secret code  to find the error positions and hence recovers the message.
The dual-variant by Niederreiter is equivalent to the McEliece cryptosystem
in terms of security.
A common tweak to reduce the size of the public key in the McEliece and
Niederreiter cryptosystems is to compute the systematic form of H, that is,
apply row operations to transform H into (In−k|T), where In−k is an identity
matrix of n − k rows and columns. Thus, only T needs to be communicated
and stored and the front identity matrix can be regenerated when needed
(this, however, requires a semantically secure conversion for the McEliece
cryptosystem, which nowadays is state-of-the-art, to ensure that the first n −
k bits of the plaintext are not revealed).
The choice of the code family is crucial for the security of code-based
cryptosystems. McEliece proposed to use binary Goppa codes, which is still
considered secure. Binary Goppa codes are defined by a support 
for a small 
 and a Goppa polynomial g of degree t. Niederreiter
proposed to use a different code family in his dual-variant, which later was
broken. However, Niederreiter’s dual-variant also remains secure when
using, for example, binary Goppa codes. Recent proposals for code-based
systems are using either McEliece’s or Niederreiter’s variant and quasi-
cyclic codes or rank metric to further reduce the size of the public key
matrices.
11.2.2.1. Scheme definition
Classic McEliece is the only code-based third-round finalist in the NIST
standardization process. While honoring the founder of code-based
cryptography in its name, Classic McEliece is using the Niederreiter variant
with binary Goppa codes in its construction. Its parameter sets aiming at
NIST security levels 1, 3, and 5 are using m ∈ {12, 13}, n ∈ {3488, 4608,
6688, 6960, 8192}, k ∈ {2720, 3360, 5024, 5283, 6528}, and t ∈ {64, 96,
119, 128}.

The secret key is a random seed δ, an irreducible Goppa polynomial g of
degree t, the support 
 and a random bit string s. The public key
is computed by generating the t × n matrix 
, where
 for i = 1, …, t and j = 1, …, n. Then 
 is converted
to the (n − k) × n matrix 
 by expanding each 
 entry of 
 into a
column of m bits. Finally, 
 is reduced to systematic form (In − k|T) and T
is used as public key.
For encapsulation, a random vector 
 of weight t is encoded to
. The error vector e is hashed to obtain C1 to
obtain the ciphertext C = (C0, C1). Finally, C is hashed together with e to
obtain the session key K.
For decapsulation, the ciphertext C is split into C0 and C1 and C0 is decoded
to e′ using the private key. If the weight of e′ is t and if C0 = (In−k|T)e, 
 is
computed by hashing e′. The check of C0 = (In−k|T)e is required to achieve
CCA security. If 
, then e′ = e and the session key is computed by
hashing e and C. Otherwise, decoding has failed and a false session key is
computed by hashing s and C.
11.2.2.2. Techniques for efficient implementation
The most time-consuming operation in the key generation of Classic
McEliece is the “systemization” of 
, that is, the computation of the
systematic form of 
, which usually is done using Gaussian elimination.
With a relatively high probability, 
 does not have a systematic form.
Therefore, Classic McEliece specifies two variants of the key-generation
algorithm: for the systematic variant, the systemization is aborted in case of
failure and a new private key is computed. For the semi-systematic variant,
an alternative algorithm is specified that allows us to swap columns (in
constant-time) such that a systematic public-key can be obtained without
repeating key generation.
Efficient implementations of the systematic variant split 
 into a (n − k) ×
(n − k) matrix M and a (n − k) × k matrix 
 such that 
 and
 and first operate on M to check if 
 has full

rank. During this computation, an LUP-decomposition of M with PM = LU
is computed such that T can be efficiently obtained as
 if 
 has full rank. This reduces the cost of
repeatedly computing on a (n − k) × n, matrix to only computing on a (n −
k) × (n − k) matrix, plus a final matrix multiplication once a public key with
systematic form has been found.
There are several decoding algorithms for binary Goppa codes. Here, we
introduce the use of the Berlekamp–Massey algorithm as implemented in
the Classic McEliece reference implantation. Due to the error-correction
capabilities of this decoding algorithm, first a double-size 2t × n parity-
check matrix 
, where 
 for i =
1, …, 2t and j = 1, …, n and a double syndrome 
 is
computed. Then the Berlekamp–Massey algorithm is used to compute an
error-locator polynomial σ from s(2). The error positions are then
determined by evaluating σ at α = {α1, …, an}. Instead of re-encrypting the
obtained error vector e′ using H, the double syndrome s′(2) of the error
vector can be computed as 
 and compared with s(2): If
s(2) = s′(2) then also C0 = (In−k|T)e′ and hence e = e′. Therefore, the large
public key is not required for re-encryption during decapsulation and hence
the public key does not need to be stored alongside the private key.
For computing 
 during key generation as well as for computing 
and for obtaining the error positions from the error-locator polynomial
during decapsulation, a polynomial needs to be evaluated for all α = {α1,
…, αn}. Since α contains most of the elements in 
 for most parameter
sets of Classic McEliece, this can efficiently be accomplished using the
additive FFT algorithm by Gao and Mateer. The syndrome computation can
be efficiently performed using a transposed FFT.
Classic McEliece requires efficient sorting algorithms for the computation
of a random permutation of field elements in 
 for obtaining α as well as
for computing a random error vector of weight t. Furthermore, the
specification of Classic McEliece requires that the support α = {α1, …, αn}
is not stored as a list of elements in 
 but as (2m − 1)2m−4 control bits for
a Beneš network, which can be obtained using an efficient sorting

algorithm. Arithmetic in 
 typically can be parallelized and hence is
suitable for bitslicing (see Chapter 7 of this volume).
11.2.2.3. Techniques for secure implementation
The specification of Classic McEliece is designed to support constant-time
implementations as much as possible. The rationale for storing the control
bits of a Beneš network as part of the secret key is that, on the one hand, the
storage requirements for the private key are significantly reduced and, on
the other hand, the correct values for α can be obtained after the evaluation
of a polynomial using an additive FFT (which operates on the natural order
of field elements) securely in constant time by applying the Beneš network
with the stored control bits to the output of the additive FFT. The
computation of a (transposed) additive FFT, the Berlekamp–Massey
algorithm, as well as sorting algorithms lend themselves for a
straightforward constant-time implementation.
Special care needs to be taken for the encoding routine: both the generation
of a weight-t error vector e as well as the computation of C0 = He might
leak timing information. A constant-time implementation of the decoding
operation can be achieved quite easily, as long as a transposed FFT is used
for the re-encryption based on the double syndrome. Otherwise, caution is
required when multiplying the parity-check matrix with e′.
During key generation, the Gaussian elimination on 
 for computing the
systematic parity-check matrix (In−k|T) must be performed in constant time.
Here, an early abort in case 
 cannot be systemized does not leak timing
information since then key generation is restarted with a fresh seed. The
irreducible Goppa polynomial can be computed using Gaussian elimination
on a matrix over 
 or using the Berlekamp–Massey algorithm, which
must be implemented in constant time as well.
There is not much work on exploiting other side channels than timing for
code-based systems. A general recommendation is to mask the use of the
private key. There are message-recovery attacks against (Classic) McEliece,
for example, single-trace attacks on encapsulation and differential attacks
on decapsulation which exploit power side channels. More research on
effective side-channel attacks and countermeasures for such attacks is
required.

11.2.3. Isogeny-based KEMs
Isogeny-based cryptography was proposed by Couveignes (2006) in “Hard
Homogeneous Spaces”, whose material was first presented during a
seminar held in the mid-1990s. One decade after, Rostovtsev and Stolbunov
(2006) independently proposed a public-key cryptosystem based on
isogenies of ordinary elliptic curves. That same year, Charles et al. (2009),
proposed a hash function whose collision resistance was provably
guaranteed by the isogeny problem defined over supersingular elliptic
curves.
Let E and E′ be two supersingular isogenous elliptic curves defined over a
finite field 
, with q a power of a large prime p. Computing an isogeny
map between E and E′ is widely believed to be a hard computational
problem in the classical and the quantum settings. It is known as the
supersingular isogeny path problem. In many scenarios, this isogeny is of
known degree ℓe for some small prime ℓ and we refer to this variant as the
supersingular fixed-degree isogeny path (SIPFD) problem. An isogeny
graph is a graph that represents the relationships between different elliptic
curves that are related to each other by isogenies. The vertices of the graph
represent elliptic curves which are determined by their j-invariant, which
classify elliptic curves in equivalence classes defined up to endomorphisms.
The edges of the graph represent isogenies between the curves.
Variants of the SIPFD problem form the basis of several isogeny-based
signatures, including the Short Quaternion and Isogeny Signature
(SQISign), which was proposed by De Feo et al. (2020). This problem also
provides the security guarantees of the Commutative Supersingular
Isogeny-based Diffie-Hellman (CSIDH) key exchange scheme, which was
introduced by Castryck et al. (2018).
Jao and De Feo (2011) proposed the Supersingular Isogeny-based Diffie-
Hellman key exchange protocol (SIDH). Apart from disclosing the degree
of its secret isogeny, SIDH also reveals the evaluation of its secret isogenies
at a large torsion subgroup. This weaker variant of SIPFD was dubbed by
the authors as the Computational Supersingular Isogeny (CSSI) problem.
SIKE, which is a variant of SIDH equipped with a key encapsulation
mechanism, was one of the few schemes that made it to the fourth round of
the NIST PQC standardization effort as an alternate KEM candidate.

For over a decade, the best-known algorithms for breaking SIDH or SIKE
had an exponential time complexity in both classical and quantum settings.
However, a recent polynomial-time attack by Castryck and Decru (2022)
that was quickly followed by two other variants, ingeniously exploited the
auxiliary information leaked in SIDH and SIKE to completely break their
security, and in the process, easily breaking and claiming a bounty for an
isogeny challenge proposed by Microsoft Research.
11.2.3.1. Schemes definitions
SIKE was the solely isogeny-based fourth-round scheme in the NIST
standardization process. The official SIKE proposal presented four
parameter sets, namely, SIKEp434, SIKEp503, SIKEp610 and SIKEp751,
achieving NIST security levels 1, 2, 3 and 5, respectively. The notation used
for these instantiations alludes to the bitlength of the underlying prime field
characteristic.
SIKE operates on Montgomery supersingular elliptic curves defined over
, where p is a large prime number of the form 
. The
exponents e2 and e3 are chosen such that 
. The public
parameters of SIKE are given by a supersingular starting curve
, and a set of six x-coordinates
corresponding to the basis points P2, Q2, P3, Q3 ∈ E0 of order 
 and 
,
respectively. Additionally, the protocol also uses the auxiliary public points
D2 = P2 − Q2 and D3 = P3 − Q3. SIKE comprises three main algorithms:
key generation, encapsulation and decapsulation (which are usually called
KeyGen, Encaps and Decaps).
In KeyGen, Bob’s public and private key {pk3, (s, sk3)} are computed by
performing the following steps. Bob’s private key sk3, is a uniformly chosen
integer in the range 
. Then, Bob computes the 
-
isogeny ϕ3 generated by the kernel point R3 = P3 + [sk3]Q3, obtaining his
public key as the tuple of image points, pk3 = (ϕ3(P2), ϕ3(Q2), ϕ3(D2)),
along with a randomly selected n-bit string s.
SIKE’s encapsulation algorithm computes Alice’s public and private key
(pk2, sk2) using an analogous procedure as the one described above. Alice

then uses a key derivation procedure to compute a secret j, which
corresponds to the j-invariant of the image supersingular elliptic curve
ϕ3(ϕ2(E0)). This algorithm outputs Alice’s public key along with the
encryption of an n-bit random message m XOR’ed with F(j), where F is a
hash function that maps j to bitstrings.
SIKE’s Decapsulation algorithm recovers the secret j′ corresponding to the
j-invariant of the image supersingular elliptic curve ϕ2(ϕ3(E0)). The value j′
is then used for finding Alice’s private key and from it, her public key. If the
received public key is identical to the one recovered, this procedure returns
as the shared secret the hash of the secret key and the encapsulation output.
Otherwise, it returns a random string.
The main computation of CSIDH consists of the evaluation of its class
group action, which takes as input an elliptic curve E0, represented by its A-
coefficient, and an ideal class 
, represented by its list of
exponents 
. This list of exponents is the
CSIDH secret key. The output of the class group action is the A-coefficient
of the elliptic curve EA defined as:
One remarkable feature of the CSIDH group action is its commutative
property. This allows us to apply the group action directly to the key
exchange between two parties by mimicking the DH protocol. Having
agreed upon using a starting elliptic curve E0, Alice and Bob choose a secret
key a and b, respectively. Then, they can produce their corresponding
public keys by computing the group actions EA = a ∗ E0 and EB = b ∗ E0.
After exchanging these public keys, Alice and Bob can obtain a common
secret by computing:
11.2.3.2. Techniques for efficient implementation
The two most expensive computational tasks of SIKE are the computation
of large smooth-degree isogenies of supersingular elliptic curves along with
the evaluation of the image of elliptic curve points in those isogenies and

elliptic curve scalar multiplication computations via three-point
Montgomery Ladder procedures. In their 2014 SIDH paper, De Feo et al.
(2014) presented optimal computation of large degree isogenies. The cost of
optimal strategies for computing a degree-ℓe isogeny is of about 
point multiplications by ℓ, 
 degree-ℓ isogeny evaluations, and e
constructions of degree-ℓ isogenous curves. Optimal strategies have also
been applied to achieve faster implementations of CSIDH.
Montgomery curves is the preferred curve model for SIKE and CSIDH,
since they enable the usage of x-only point arithmetic. This can be
advantageously used for performing scalar multiplications with x-
coordinates that always lie in the base prime field 
. The Montgomery
model is also useful for computing close to optimal isogeny evaluations.
For practical implementations of CSIDH, constructing and evaluating n
degree-ℓi isogenies, plus O(n2) scalar multiplications by the prime factors ℓi,
overwhelmingly dominate its computational cost. CSIDH uses a prime p
such that 
, where ℓ1, …, ℓn are small odd primes.
This choice permits us to compute efficiently the degree- ℓi isogenies
corresponding to the group action of the ideal  of norm ℓi.
Vélu’s formulas have been profusely used in the last 50 years for
constructing and evaluating degree-ℓ isogenies by performing three main
algorithms known as KPS, xISOG and xEVAL. KPS computes the first ℓ
multiples of the kernel point P, namely, the set {P, [2]P, …, [ℓ]P = ∞}. The
calculations done in KPS are then used as pre-computation database for
xISOG and xEVAL. xISOG and xEVAL find the constants 
 that
determine the codomain curve E′, and the x-coordinate ϕx(α) of the image
point Q, respectively. The computational cost associated with Velu’s
formulas is of O(ℓ) operations. Bernstein et al. (2020) presented a
breakthrough approach for constructing and evaluating degree-ℓ isogenies
at a combined cost of just 
 operations. This approach has been
referred to as square-root Vélu.

11.2.3.3. Techniques for secure implementation
In July 2022, Castryck and Decru presented a devastating attack against
SIKE. This attack can heuristically solve the CSSI problem in polynomial
time, as it was convincingly shown by an accompanying Magma script,
which breaks in a matter of hours, random SIKE instances that were once
aimed for achieving NIST levels 1, 2, 3 and 5. This original attack was soon
improved to break all SIKE instances in a matter of minutes.
The Castryck and Decru attack relies on the knowledge of three crucial
pieces of information, namely, (i) the degree of the isogeny ϕ2, (ii) the ring
endomorphism of SIKE’s starting curve E0 and (iii) the images ϕ3(P2),
ϕ3(Q2) of Alice’s generator points 
, where the prime
 is the underlying prime used by SIKE instantiations. We
stress here that (ii) and (iii) are only known in the specific case of the CSSI
problem, but not in the more general case of the SIPFD problem.
Furthermore, another attack by Maino and Martindale and yet another one
by Robert quickly followed. Maino and Martindale’s attack does not require
knowledge of the endomorphism ring associated with the base curve.
Robert’s attack can also break SIDH in polynomial time for any random
initial supersingular elliptic curve E0.
Since the publication of the Castryck and Decru attack, several
countermeasures have already been proposed by trying to hide the degree of
the isogeny or the images of the torsion points. These solutions are
considerably less efficient and practical than the original construction.
On the other hand, CSIDH does not leak any auxiliary information and, for
a sensitive choice of parameters, remains secure against all known classical
and quantum attacks. Despite its low performance, CSIDH has the smallest
public keys of all post-quantum key exchange schemes and is the only one
that is commutative. Furthermore, CSIDH admits an efficient public key
validation procedure, a feature that permits its usage in the static-dynamic
and static-static key exchange settings.
The security guarantees of CSIDH (and its variant CTIDH) rest on an
analogue of the discrete logarithm problem: given the base elliptic curve E0
and the public-key elliptic curve 
, we deduced the ideal
class . Hence, the classical security of CSIDH lies in the problem of

finding an isogeny path from the isogenous supersingular elliptic curves E0
and EA. From a quantum setting perspective, the best-known attack is
Kuperberg’s procedure, which has a quantum time and space sub-
exponential complexity of 
.
11.2.4. IND-CCA2 security
Most post-quantum key-encapsulation mechanisms have in common that
the core constructions only achieve chosen-plaintext attack (CPA) security,
that is, they are only secure in the presence of a passive adversary that
cannot perform chosen-ciphertext attacks (CCA). While in some cases, CPA
security may be sufficient (e.g. when secret keys are only used once), many
protocols do require CCA security, that is, assuming an active adversary
that can manipulate ciphertexts. As it is preferable to standardize and
deploy as few cryptographic systems as possible, we commonly focus on
CCA-secure schemes. We distinguish between IND-CCA1 and IND-CCA2
security. For the former, the adversary can query arbitrary ciphertexts from
a decryption oracle only before receiving the ciphertext they want to attack,
while for IND-CCA2, the attacker can perform oracle queries before and
after receiving the target ciphertext. In practice, we want to achieve IND-
CCA2 security.
Fortunately, generic transformations from CPA security to IND-CCA2
security exist, such as the Fujisaki–Okamoto transform for probabilistic
PKEs, which is used in Kyber, and Dent’s variant for deterministic cases,
which is used in Classic McEliece (see decapsulation in section 11.2.2.1).
11.2.4.1. The Fujisaki–Okamoto transform
The general idea of CCA transforms is simple: we have to ensure that a
given ciphertext was honestly generated before revealing the decryption.
The Fujisaki–Okamoto achieves this by re-encrypting the decrypted
plaintext and then comparing the re-encryption to the ciphertext. In case the
re-encryption matches the ciphertext, the ciphertext was generated honestly.
If there is a mismatch, this indicates that the input ciphertext was faulty and
possibly malicious. In that case, the plaintext must not be revealed, but
instead either a random value (implicit rejection) or an error message
(explicit rejection) needs to be returned.

For allowing the re-encryption to produce the same ciphertext, the
encryption procedure requires to be fully deterministic, which is achieved
by generating all required randomness pseudo-randomly from the (random)
message. In its simplest form, the FO transform constructs an IND-CCA2-
secure KEM from a CPA public-key encryption system consisting of the
algorithms CPA.KeyGen(), CPA.Encrypt(pk, m, coins), and
CPA.Decrypt(sk, c) (with coins corresponding to the required randomness)
using a hash-function 
 in the following way:
CCA.KeyGen():
- pk,sk ← CPA.KeyGen()
CCA.Encaps(pk):
- x ← {0, 1}256
- k, 
- c ← CPA.Encrypt(pk, x, coins)
CCA.Decaps(sk, c):
- x’ ← CPA.Decrypt(sk, c)
- k, 
- c’ ← CPA.Encrypt(pk, x’, coins’)
- verify that c’=c
Variants of the FO transform (as for example used by Kyber) additionally
apply two tweaks to this construction: first, the shared secret is derived
from the so-called pre-key k by hashing it together with the ciphertext c.
Second, the public key gets added as input to the hash deriving coins for
protecting against multi-target attacks and turning the construction into a
contributory KEM.
11.2.4.2. Secure implementation
Implementing the FO transform securely is an astonishingly hard problem
that has not been entirely solved in the literature so far. For passive side-
channel attacks, this is primarily caused by the much larger attack surface.

The processed plaintext has to be considered secret, requiring the entire FO
re-encryption to be protected against side-channel attacks. Furthermore, it is
often sufficient to distinguish if two ciphertexts decrypt to the same
plaintext or not to mount so-called plaintext-checking oracle (PC oracle)
attacks. PC-oracle attacks have been demonstrated for code-based KEMs
exploiting tiny timing differences in the re-encryption, depending on the
plaintext. While these timing-based PC-oracle attacks can be thwarted by
ensuring that no timing leakage occurs in re-encryption revealing
information about the processed plaintext, protection is much harder when
considering more powerful side-channel attacks. When using masking as a
countermeasure against power-consumption-based side-channel attacks, this
primarily requires to use a much higher masking order than commonly used
on other cryptography. For example, while cryptography without the FO
transformation may be sufficiently secure at masking order 2 or 3, post-
quantum schemes require much higher masking order with some literature
showing that even fifth-order masking is insufficient.
The FO transform can also be attacked using fault injection attacks. In the
most-straightforward attack, the attacker simply skips the comparison of the
ciphertext and the re-encryption, hence completely disabling the purpose of
the FO. Another attack avenue is to transmit a faulty ciphertext and to use
fault injection to fault the ciphertext back to the original ciphertext, causing
the FO to accept the faulty ciphertext in case it decrypts to the same
message, that is, providing a PC oracle to the attacker. Countermeasures
against fault attacks on the FO are thus far limited to generic
countermeasures like fault detection using redundant computation or
shuffling computations to increase the attack complexity. The efficacy of
such countermeasures is not yet well understood.
11.3. Post-quantum signatures
Just like for KEMs, also post-quantum signature schemes are constructed
for a variety of underlying assumptions. The first batch of signatures that
will be standardized by NIST includes two lattice-based schemes and one
hash-based scheme. In addition, schemes based on the hardness of solving
large multivariate systems of equations were prominently represented in the
first three rounds of the NIST competition, and we expect that more

schemes following this approach will be submitted to the upcoming NIST
call for additional post-quantum signatures. Also, multiple signature
schemes based on isogenies of elliptic curves (see section 11.2.3) have been
proposed in the last couple of years and are likely to enter the NIST
competition for additional signatures.
Unlike KEMs, post-quantum signatures are diverse also from a different
point of view: while all CCA-secure KEMs follow the approach of first
constructing a passively secure PKE and then using some generic transform
to construct a CCA-secure KEM, signature schemes are built using very
different “templates”: Dilithium is using Fiat-Shamir, Falcon is using a
hash-and-sign approach and hash-based signatures like SPHINCS+ are
typically constructed using Merkle trees; yet other schemes (like the round
3 alternate scheme Picnic) use multiparty computation in the head.
11.3.1. Lattice-based signatures – Dilithium
Lattice-based signatures are divided into two major families, either
following the hash-and-sign paradigm or the Fiat–Shamir-with-aborts
approach. Hash-and-sign schemes are represented in the NIST competition
by Falcon and date back to 2003 when Hoffstein et al. (2003) introduced
NTRUSign. Fiat–Shamir-with-aborts signatures date back to work by
Lyubashevsky (2009). The corresponding finalist in the NIST competition
is Dilithium. In the following, we focus on the Fiat–Shamir-with-aborts
signatures and Dilithium.
Dilithium relies on the hardness of the MLWE problem (as introduced in
section 11.2.1) and the module-short-integer-solutions (MSIS) problem. The
MSIS problem is to find a “short” 
, given a matrix 
,
such that Av ≡ 0 mod q. In particular, Dilithium requires a variant of MSIS
called SelfTargetMSIS, which asks to find a vector [z c v]⊤ with small
coefficients and a hash of a message μ, such that:

with H a random oracle, 
 and 
 uniformly random and I
the identity matrix.
11.3.1.1. Scheme definition
Dilithium is one of the two lattice-based signature finalists in the NIST
standardization process. It consists of three parameter sets aiming at the
security levels 2, 3 and 5. Across all parameter sets, the same polynomial
ring 
 with n = 256 and q = 223 − 213 + 1 is
used, allowing efficient polynomial multiplication using NTTs. The core
differences for each security level are the dimensions of the matrix (k × ℓ),
the range of the masking vector (γ1) and the range of the secret key (η). The
parameters (k, ℓ, γ1, η) are (4, 4, 217, 2) for security level 2, (6, 5, 219, 4) for
security level 3 and (8, 7, 219, 2) for security level 5. The remaining
parameters (d, τ, γ2, ω) are chosen accordingly.
We describe a simplified form of Dilithium without public key compression
and deterministic signing. The public key is (ρ, t) consisting of the seed ρ
used to pseudo-randomly sample the uniform matrix 
 and t =
As1 + s2. The private key is (ρ, t, s1, s2) consisting of the public key, and the
two secret vectors s1 and s2.
To sign a hash M of a message, a uniformly random masking vector
 with coefficients in [−γ1, γ1] is sampled. The signer then computes
w = Ay and computes the high bits of w (referred to as w1), such that w =
2γ2w1 + w0. The challenge polynomial c is derived from the hash H (M ||
w1). Here, H () is a special hash function that outputs a “short” polynomial
which has a small number of coefficients (τ) set to -1 or 1. A potential
signature is computed as z = y + cs1. Outputting this signature directly
would potentially leak information about the secret s1 and, hence, rejection
sampling has to be used. If a signature is rejected, the signer starts with a

fresh masking vector y and tries again. The signer rejects z if any
coefficient of z is larger than γ1 − τη. Additionally, the signer rejects if the
lower bits of Ay − cs2 are larger than γ2 − τη as this would result in a carry
from the lower bits into the higher bits of w during verification and,
consequently, an invalid signature. The signature then consists of (z, c).
To check a signature (z, c), the verifier re-computes the high bits of w as
. They can then check that 
. We also
need to verify that z does not contain any coefficients larger than γ1 − τη.
There are two main differences between the simplified version of Dilithium
above compared to the specification submitted to NIST. A major difference
is that Dilithium uses compressed public keys, that is, only the high bits t1
of t = 2dt1 + t0 are stored in the public key. While this reduces public key
size, it also slightly complicates the scheme as the verifier is no longer able
to reliably compute w1 from z, c, and t1. This is due to the carries
introduced by ct0 from the lower part to the higher part of w1. This is
resolved by adding a hint vector h containing the position of said carries to
the signature. Another difference is that Dilithium is deterministic rather
than the probabilistic scheme presented above. Instead of sampling y at
random, Dilithium derives it pseudo-randomly from a seed K (part of the
secret key), the hash of the message M, a hash of the public key tr
(precomputed as a part of the secret key) and a counter that is incremented
in case of rejections. This results in a deterministic signature scheme, which
is needed by some of the security proofs and is also preferable in case no
good randomness source is available.
11.3.1.2. Techniques for efficient implementation
Similar to Kyber, the core arithmetic operation is polynomial multiplication
and 
 is chosen, such that fast NTTs can be used. Dilithium uses a
modulus q for which 512-th roots of unity exist and, hence, a complete NTT
is used. The implementation techniques for NTTs described in section
11.2.1 carry over to Dilithium. The core difference to the Kyber NTTs is the
much larger q. As the modulus is 23 bits, the natural size of coefficients in
software implementations is 32 bits.

The large modulus, however, presents a challenge for some architectures as
a long 32 × 32-bit constant-time multiplier is not always available. For
example, the Arm Cortex-M3 only has a variable-time long-multiply
instruction which cannot be safely used for computing 32-bit NTTs on
secret inputs. Note that not all NTTs in Dilithium are operating on secret
inputs. For example, all NTTs in verifications as well as the NTT of c and t0
may be performed using variable-time instructions. Another challenge is
that, for example, AVX2 does not have a high-multiply for 32-bit inputs, but
only for 16-bit inputs. However, such an instruction is needed for fast
Montgomery multiplications. This results in a much slower implementation
as we have to fall back to widening multiplications.
11.3.1.3. Techniques for secure implementation
For Dilithium implementations protected from timing side-channel attacks,
we have to slightly deviate from the standard definition of constant-time
implementations. Usually, a constant-time implementation is defined as not
having any data flow from secret data into branching conditions, memory
addresses, or into instructions that have data-dependent timing. However,
Dilithium does have data flow from the secret key to the signature, which is
used in a branching condition in the rejection sampling. However, since the
(candidate) signature is public according to the security proof, this does not
present any problem. When using standard tools for finding timing leaks in
Dilithium implementations, this branch will likely be found as a false
positive.
Protecting Dilithium from other side-channel attacks proves to be
significantly harder than for lattice-based encryption. The polynomial
arithmetic itself is easily masked using arithmetic masking. However, the
remainder of the scheme is much harder to mask. In particular, the sampling
of y and the rejection sampling are best implemented using Boolean
masking, requiring a conversion between arithmetic and Boolean masking.
As of today, there is no fully masked implementation of Dilithium
available. The available masked implementations either implement the
predecessor GLP or modify Dilithium to use a power-of-two modulus
allowing for more efficient masking.
Differential fault attacks present a serious threat to Dilithium. When using
the deterministic variant of Dilithium, an adversary can inject a fault into

the computation of c. The faulty c′ is then used to compute a faulty
signature z′ = y + c′s1. By subtracting the faulty signature from a valid
signature z = y + cs1, it is easy to compute s1. To prevent this attack, we
should use the randomized variant of Dilithium whenever fault attacks
present a viable attack vector. For protecting against weak randomness,
Dilithium derives the masking vector from a secret seed K, the hash of the
message M, the hash of the public key tr and a random value ρ′. If ρ′ is
weak, the resulting scheme is still secure.
11.3.2. Multivariate-quadratic-based signatures – UOV
Multivariate cryptography is based on the NP-hardness of solving a system
of multivariate polynomials. The public key is a multivariate polynomial
system 
 over some finite field , while the private key is a
trapdoor secret that allows the owner of the key to invert the multivariate
system and to compute 
. For a multivariate encryption scheme, the
ciphertext c is obtained by evaluating the system for the plain text m as
. In order to decrypt, the receiver computes 
using the trapdoor secret. A signature scheme is constructed
correspondingly by computing the signature s as 
. This
signature can be verified by evaluating the public map 
 and by
verifying that m = m′.
The first multivariate-quadratic (MQ) signature scheme called C* was
proposed by Matsumoto and Imai (1988). However, C* was later found to
insecure by Patarin (1995). Shortly after, in 1996, Patarin introduced an
improved cryptosystem following the idea of Matsumoto and Imai called
hidden field equations (HFE). While HFE in general remains unbroken up
until today, all efficient instantiation have been shown to be insecure.
Besides the HFE proposals, there have been a number of proposals based on
the “Oil and Vinegar” scheme proposed by Patarin (1997). Soon after, the
original OV was shown to be insecure by Kipnis and Shamir (1998).
However, another year later, Kipnis et al. (1999) proposed an improved
cryptosystem called “Unbalanced oil and vinegar” (UOV). In the third
round of the NIST PQC competition, there were two schemes based on
MQ: the finalist Rainbow and the alternate GeMSS. Rainbow is an
extension of UOV, while GeMSS is based on HFE. In addition, there was a

third MQ-based scheme in the second round of the NIST PQC competition
called MQDSS, neither based on UOV nor HFE. Unfortunately, all three
have suffered severe attacks in the process of the NIST PQC competition.
We restrict this chapter to the original UOV, which remains unbroken up
until today.
11.3.2.1. Scheme definition
The core construction of all MQ schemes is similar: Let 
 be a finite field.
A common choice is 
, for example, 
 or 
. A MQ scheme has a
public map 
 where 
and 
 are randomly chosen affine and easy to invert maps,
that is, 
 and 
.
The central map 
, however, is quadratic and easy to invert. For
UOV, the map 
 may be omitted, and hence, 
. This is,
however, not the case for more advanced schemes like Rainbow and HFE.
Key generation consists of choosing 
, 
, and 
, and computing 
. To
sign (a hash of) a message 
, we apply the inverse of 
, 
 and 
to obtain the signature 
. To verify a signature 
, we check
if (the hash of) the message w′ is equal to 
. For an MQ scheme to be
secure, 
 must be hard to invert without the knowledge of 
, 
 or 
.
The security of any MQ scheme stems from the construction of the central
map 
. For UOV, 
 consists of m quadratic equations of the form:
with v being the number of vinegar variables (xi for 1 ≤ i ≤ v) and n being g
the total number of variables. It is easy to see that the o = n − v oil variables
are not combined with other oil variables in the quadratic terms. Without a
loss of security, the linear and constant terms can be left out, that is,
 and δ(k) = 0. To compute the inverse of 
, we choose the
vinegar variables at random which turns the quadratic equations into a
linear system of equations which can be solved for the oil variables (xi for v

< i ≤ n). In case no solution exists, we restart with another set of randomly
chosen vinegar variables.
A common optimization that does not affect the security is to restrict the
map 
 to linear maps, that is, vT = 0. Another optimization is to choose 
to have a special structure:
This optimization does not impact the security of the schemes as for any
public key 
, there exists a 
 and 
 and finding any pair 
, 
, such that
 breaks the security of the scheme.
The public key consists of the m polynomials in 
. Each polynomial
has 
 coefficients corresponding to zizj for 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ n. For efficient
implementation, we represent these polynomials as a Macauley matrix with
m rows and 
 columns. The columns are ordered, such that they
correspond to the monomials zi zj in lexicographic order. The matrix is
stored in a column-major form.
11.3.2.2. Techniques for efficient implementation
Throughout key generation, signing and verification, we need efficient 
arithmetic. We restrict the following to the most common case where q = 2k.
For other choices (e.g. the popular choice q = 31), other techniques are
used. While addition is trivial for 
, multiplication and inversion require
more attention. Multiplication is much more dominant than inversion. It
benefits well from vectorization as one always operated on many field
elements in parallel. If available, specialized instructions for 
 should be
used. For example, Intel’s Galois Field New Instructions (GFNI) and Arm’s
binary polynomial multiplication instructions can be beneficial with the
former being much more powerful than the latter. Alternatively, in-register
table lookups (e.g. Arm Neon’s VTBL or Intel AVX2’s VPSHUFB) should
be used if supported by the platform. On platforms without either of the
above, bitslicing is the preferred approach for implementing 

multiplication. On platforms without a cache, we may want to consider
using table look-ups from memory.
During signing, the most time-consuming operation is the inversion of the
central map 
, which requires us to solve a linear system of equation. This
is achieved using constant-time Gaussian elimination. It proceeds as normal
Gauss elimination, except when making sure that the pivot element is non-
zero, we have to conditionally add all the subsequent rows instead of just
one. In case the system of linear equations does not have a solution, we may
abort early as we have to start with a fresh set of vinegar variables.
For verification, the only operation besides hashing of the message is the
evaluation of the public map. This consists of the computation of all
monomials zizj for 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ n followed by a multiplication of the product
with the corresponding column in the Macauley matrix. The products are
then accumulated. Since multiplication is much more expensive than
accumulation, it is beneficial to minimize the number of field
multiplications. This can be done by using one accumulator for each
possible value of zizj ≠ 0, that is, 15 accumulators for 
. For 
, we
can use two sets of accumulators for the lower and higher nibble of zizj
separately, that is, we require 2 × 15 accumulators. Note that this results in a
signature-dependent memory access pattern, which can only be used if the
signature is considered public or memory access is constant time.
11.3.2.3. Techniques for secure implementation
Work on protecting UOV or Rainbow from other side-channel attacks other
than timing attacks is very limited. For Rainbow, the straightforward target
for DPA during the signing operation is to attack the 
 computation,
which processes the secret key 
 and the known input w. In UOV, the
knowledge of 
 is sufficient to forge signatures. In Rainbow, we
additionally need to recover 
, which can either be done using algebraic
attacks or by another side-channel attack. The side-channel attack is
possible since the signature z is known and 
 has a special sparse
structure allowing for a full recovery using CPA. Protection against CPA is
not sufficiently studied yet and up until today no masked implementations
of either UOV or Rainbow are available.

11.3.3. Hash-based signatures – XMSS and SPHINCS+
Hash-based signature schemes go back to the work by Lamport (1979) on
one-time signature schemes constructed from a one-way function. The basic
idea is to use a secret bit string as private key and its hash value as public
key. The most basic construction is a one-time one-bit signature scheme:
Alice generates two secret strings s0 and s1 and publishes their hash values
h0 = h(s0) and h1 = h(s1) as public verification key. Since Alice is using a
cryptographically secure hash function h(), nobody can obtain s0 and s1
from h0 and h1. If later, Alice wants to sign the one-bit message m, she
releases the secret string sm alongside m. Anyone that earlier obtained the
public key (h0, h1) from Alice can now verify that hm = h(sm). Since
previously, only Alice knew s0 and s1, the one-bit message m must be from
Alice. However, since Alice released part of the secret information, she
cannot use this private-public key pair again. Hence, this simple scheme is a
one-bit one-time signature scheme.
To construct signature schemes for longer messages, more hash values can
be published as public key: to sign a 256-bit message, we could generate 2
× 256 hash values, using one pair to sign each bit of a 256-bit message.
More efficiently, hash chains can be used instead: Winternitz proposed to
split a message of n bit into l0 = n/w words of w bits and to concatenate the
message with its check sum computed over the message words, also split
into l1 words of w bits. The Winternitz one-time signature scheme (WOTS)
then uses l = l0 + l1 hash chains, each of length 2w steps. To generate a
public key, Alice starts out with l secret bit strings ri,0 with 0 ≤ i < l, she
hashes these strings 2w times such that ri,j+1 = h(ri,j) for 0 < i ≤ 2w, and
publishes 
 as public key. To sign, she takes the ith w-bit word of the
message for 0 ≤ i < l, treats the w-bit word as an integer Mi and recomputes
the Mith chain step 
 of the ith hash chain. The corresponding elements
of all chains are then the signature. For verification, Bob, for all 0 ≤ i < l
also takes the ith w-bit word of the message and treats it as an integer Mi.
He then hashes the signature element 
 another 2w − Mi times and
verifies that he reaches the public key element 
. If that is the case for

all l w-bit words of the message, the signature is successfully verified. This
gives us a fairly efficient arbitrary-length one-time signature scheme.
To get from arbitrary-length one-time signature schemes to arbitrary-length
many-time signature schemes, we can use binary Merkle trees as proposed
by Merkle (1990). The leaf nodes of the Merkle tree are (a hash of) the
public keys of one-time signature schemes. The leaf nodes are pairwise
hashed over several layers of a binary tree until a single root node is
computed. The value of this root node is the public key. For generating a
signature in a Merkle tree, a verification path needs to be provided, that is,
the pair-nodes on the layers of the Merkle tree that are required to reach the
root node from a given leaf node such that for verification, the verifier can
re-compute the root node from a leaf node and compare it to the public key.
Using many arbitrary-length one-time signature schemes as leaf nodes of a
binary Merkle hash-tree, we obtain a arbitrary-length many-time signature
scheme. Observe that the number of possible signatures per signature key
pair is limited by the height of the Merkle tree and hence needs to be
decided and fixed at key-generation time.
11.3.3.1. Scheme definition
Common hash-based signature schemes are the stateful signature schemes
XMSS and LMS as well as the stateless signature scheme SPHINCS+. In
stateful signature schemes, information needs to be stored at the signers
side which one-time signature schemes at the leaves of the Merkle tree have
already been used; in stateless signature scheme, such a state does not need
to be maintained.
Both XMSS and LMS work as described above: they are using variants of
WOTS at the leaves of a binary Merkle tree. There are multi-tree versions
of XMSS and LMS where a leaf node on one tree is used to sign a root node
of another tree, which provides a trade-off between computation time (key
generation and signing) as well as the signature length.
As mentioned above, SPHINCS+ is a stateless signature scheme. This is
achieved by on the one hand using many layers in a multi-tree setting and
on the other hand few-time signature schemes at the highest tree level such
that the probability is negligible that a randomly selected leaf is used more
often than the few-time signature scheme tolerates.

Both XMSS and SPHINCS+ are using masks as well as keyed hash-
functions to ward off multi-target attacks and provide strong security
proofs, while the construction of LMS is slightly simpler and cheaper at the
cost of reduced security guarantees.
11.3.3.2. Techniques for efficient implementation
The main cost factor of hash-based signature schemes is the computation of
a hash function with small inputs and small outputs many times. Hence, any
optimization that is applied to the hash function directly translates into a
speed-up of key generation, signing, and verification. Common techniques
for accelerating hash functions are to provide hardware accelerators or
instruction set extensions. Since many of the hash operations are
independent (e.g. hashing in the different WOTS chains), vectorization and
SIMD parallelization can be used.
Depending on the hash function and the parameter set, some prefixes in the
hash inputs may be repeated frequently during the hash computations. If
these common prefixes fit into one hash block, the resulting intermediate
state can be stored and restored instead of repeating corresponding hash
computations.
For signing of stateful hash-based signature schemes, the Merkle trees are
traversed in order. Hence, some of the computations and some parts of the
signature can be shared between consecutive signing operations. Such
information can be cached and elaborate tree-traversal algorithms can be
used to balance computational cost and storage requirements for efficient
signing operations. Such approaches typically are less helpful for stateless
signature schemes, since the Merkle trees here are not traversed in-order but
the starting leaves are selected randomly between consecutive signature
operations.
11.3.3.3. Techniques for secure implementation
The attack surface for side-channel attacks on hash-based signature
schemes is small. The majority of the computation occur in the Merkle
trees, which only consist of public data and are, hence, not relevant for
passive side-channel attacks. The only place where secret data is processed
is the hash chains of the WOTS signatures and, for SPHINCS+, the few-

time signatures. However, these are only processing the secret key and no
other variable data known to the attacker. Hence, differential attacks (e.g.
CPA) are not possible. The only viable attack type for these schemes
appears to be single-trace attacks. Another target is the generation of the
secret keys. Those are expanded from a seed together with the address of
the corresponding secret key in the tree using a pseudo-random function. As
the seed is global for the entire (hyper-)tree, it is called many times with
different addresses within a single signature generation. As the address is
known to the attacker, it allows attacking the seed in multiple invocations of
the pseudo-random function in a differential attack. Hence, the pseudo-
random function needs to be protected against side-channel attacks.
Fault attacks present a much larger threat for hash-based signatures, in
particular if they are stateless. The multi-tree structure of SPHINCS+ works
and is secure, despite the use of one-time signatures at the leaves of the
inner trees, because the entire structure is deterministically defined:
whenever the same inner leaf node is visited during a signing operation,
then the same three nodes of the next higher tree is being signed – hence,
the same chain nodes of the one-time signature scheme are computed and
released as part of the signature. If, however, a fault is introduced randomly
at any time during the signing process (e.g. during the pair-wise hashing in
one of the Merkle trees), then with high probability, the root node of the
corresponding tree is going to be different than in a non-faulted signature
generation. Therefore, a different root node is signed by the next lower one-
time signature scheme. Signing different messages with the same one-time
signature scheme breaks its security. Hence, if an attacker can inject
different faults during the computation of a specific sub-tree, an alternative
private key for the following one-time signature scheme can be derived,
allowing the attacker to sign arbitrary messages. A signature that has been
faulted as described above still verifies correctly (as long as the lowest tree
is not affected by the fault). Therefore, such a faulty signature cannot
simply be detected by verification. This puts SPHINCS+ (and other hash-
based signature schemes using a multi-tree structure such as XMSS-MT)
into significant risk in scenarios where an attacker can inject faults during
signature generation. For stateful schemes, this can be prevented by caching
intermediate signatures, which is usually done to improve performance
anyway.

11.4. Notes and further references
Section 11.2.1. Lattice-based public-key encryption and key
encapsulation goes back to the NTRU scheme by Hoffstein et al.
(1998). The public-key encryption scheme used in Kyber was
introduced by Lyubashevsky et al. (2010, 2013) and goes back to the
work by Regev (2005, 2009). Kyber was introduced in Bos et al.
(2018); the latest version of the specification is in Schwabe et al.
(2022). It also draws many ideas, in particular with regard to a design
enabling efficient and secure implementations from the NewHope
scheme from Alkim et al. (2016). The other two lattice-based KEM
finalist schemes in the NIST PQC project were NTRU (Chen et al.
2020) and Saber (D’Anvers et al. 2020).
Over the last decade, many works improved the performance of
multiplication in polynomial rings that are used by lattice-based
encryption schemes and KEMs. Some of these works such as
Bernstein et al. (2017), Karmakar et al. (2018), and Kannwischer et al.
(2019) employ Karatsuba or Toom techniques, but most recent works
focus on NTT-based multiplication in NTT-friendly rings (see for
example Alkim et al. (2020); Becker et al. (2021); Abdulrahman et al.
(2022)) and also in NTT-unfriendly rings (see for example Alkim et al.
(2021) and Chung et al. (2021)). Another recent direction of work on
implementations of lattice-based crypto is formally verifying
correctness of arithmetic (e.g. Hwang et al. 2022) or full schemes (e.g.
Almeida et al. 2023).
Various papers present masked implementations of lattice-based
public-key encryption schemes and KEMs (see for example Oder et al.
(2018); Beirendonck et al. (2021); Bos et al. (2021); Heinz et al.
(2022); Kamucheka et al. (2022); Kundu et al. (2022)) and building
blocks (such as D’Anvers et al. 2023). Combined countermeasures
against side-channel and fault analysis are presented in Heinz and
Pöppelmann (2022); these are based on a redundant representation of
coefficients in Zq and adding a sort of “checksum computations”
through a CRT-based technique. A survey of side-channel protections
of lattice-based schemes is given in Ravi et al. (2022).

Even more papers present side-channel and fault attacks against
lattice-based KEMs, some also against protected implementations (see,
for example, Hamburg et al. (2021); Delvaux and Merino Del Pozo
(2021); Ngo et al. (2021, 2022); Backlund et al. (2022); Dubrova et al.
(2022)). Another class of attack papers considers chosen-ciphertext
attacks against the passively secure PKE schemes that are typically
underlying CCA-secure KEMs (see, for example, Fluhrer (2016);
Bauer et al. (2019); Qin et al. (2021)).Although these attacks do not
violate any security claims of the schemes, they become relevant in a
scenario where the information hidden by the FO transform (i.e. the
information if decryption succeeded) can be recovered from side-
channel information.
Section 11.2.2. The McEliece cryptosystem has been introduced in
McEliece (1978) and its dual variant by Niederreiter (1986). The third-
round specification of Classic McEliece can be found in Albrecht et al.
(2020). Implementation tricks using additive FFT and transpose FFT
as well as a Beneš network are explained in Chou (2017). Further
implementation tweaks can be found in Chen and Chou (2021). The
hardware implementations accompanying the Classic McEliece
submission is described in Wang et al. (2017, 2018).
Code-based alternative candidates in the third round of the NIST
standardization process are BIKE (Aragon et al. 2020) and HQC
(Aguilar Melchor et al. 2020). Since both BIKE and HQC are using
quasi-cyclic codes, their implementation requires efficient polynomial
arithmetic. BIKE is using a bit-flipping decoder while HQC uses the
Berlekamp–Massey algorithm.
Another interesting code-family for the use in code-based
cryptography are rank codes. Low Rank Parity Check (LRPC) cods are
used, for example, for the round-1 schemes Ouroboros-R (Aguilar
Melchor et al. 2017), LAKE (Aragon et al. 2017a) and LOCKER
(Aragon et al. 2017b). These schemes have been joined to ROLLO in
round 2 (Aragon et al. 2019) and strongly depend on efficient Gaussian
reduction for rank computations during decapsulation.
Besides cryptanalytic attacks that attempt to exploit the code structure
of a code-based scheme, Information Set Decoding (ISD) is the most

relevant generic attack. ISD goes back to Prange (1962) and has been
improved over time (for example, by Lee and Brickell 1988; Stern
1988; Finiasz and Sendrier 2009; Becker et al. 2012). Security
analyses of code-based schemes can be found in, for example, Baldi et
al. (2019) and Esser and Bellini (2021).
Section 11.2.3. In a seminar held in 1997, Couveignes proposed an
isogeny-based scheme for mimicking the Diffie-Hellman key
exchange protocol. Couveignes notes were later posted in Couveignes
(2006). The first concrete isogeny-based cryptographic primitive was
presented by Charles et al. (2009), where the authors proposed a hash
function whose collision resistance was extracted from the problem of
path-finding in supersingular isogeny graphs. As early as 2006,
Rostovtsev and Stolbunov (2006) introduced isogeny-based
cryptographic schemes, proposing a Diffie–Hellman-like protocol
whose security guarantees were based on the difficulty of finding
smooth-degree isogenies between ordinary elliptic curves. While the
best classical algorithm by Galbraith and Stolbunov solves this
problem in full exponential time, Childs et al. (2014) a quantum
algorithm computing such isogenies in subexponential time. Jao and
De Feo (2011) proposed a Diffie–Hellman key-exchange scheme, this
time relying on the difficulty of constructing isogenies between
supersingular elliptic curves. Since the endomorphism ring of a
supersingular elliptic curve is no longer commutative, the underlying
isogeny problem was, for more than a decade, supposed to be much
more difficult to solve. Within the context of the NIST standardization
process, it was proposed in Jao et al. (2020) a SIDH variant equipped
with a key encapsulation mechanism called SIKE. SIKE was selected
as one of the fourth-round alternate KEM candidates of the NIST
contest. Castryck and Decru (2022) presented in July 2022 a
devastating attack against SIKE that was quickly followed by Maino
and Martindale (2022) and Robert (2022). Quickly after that, the
authors of SIKE officially withdrawn their NIST submission.
Section 11.2.4. The Fujisaki–Okamoto transform was introduced in
Fujisaki and Okamoto (1999). The security as part of post-quantum
constructions was extensively studied in Hofheinz et al. (2017). Higher
order masking of the FO transform within lattice-based cryptography

is covered in Bos et al. (2021). PC oracle attacks were introduced and
analyzed in D’Anvers et al. (2019) and Guo et al. (2022). Fault attacks
on CCA-secure lattice schemes was first studied in Hermelink et al.
(2021) and Pessl and Prokop (2021).
Section 11.3.1. Lattice-based signatures have a rather young history
and date back to NTRUSign in Hoffstein et al. (2003). The NIST
finalist Falcon by Prest et al. (2020) is based on NTRUSign. However,
Dilithium (see Ducas et al. 2018; Lyubashevsky et al. 2020) is
unrelated to NTRUSign and instead is based on FiatĐShamir-with-
aborts (see Lyubashevsky 2009). Efficient implementations of
Dilithium are described in Seiler (2018) for AVX2 and in Greconici et
al. (2021) for Cortex-M4. Fault attacks on Dilithium have been studied
in Bruinderink and Pessl (2018). In Barthe et al. (2018), masking of
the scheme GLP by Güneysu et al. (2012) is studied. Masking
Dilithium was studied in Migliore et al. (2019).
Section 11.3.2. Multivariate-quadratic signature date back to
Matsumoto and Imai (1988). However, their original proposal C* got
broken in Patarin (1995). Later proposals include HFE (Patarin 1996)
and OV (Patarin 1997). While the original OV parameters got broken
in Kipnis and Shamir (1998), the variation UOV described in Kipnis et
al. (1999) remains unbroken up until today. Rainbow was proposed in
Ding and Schmidt (2005) and uses multiple layers of the UOV scheme.
It was shown in Ding et al. (2008), that it can only be secured with at
most two layers. Rainbow is also a third-round finalist in the NIST
PQC project. The specification can be found in Ding et al. (2020).
Other proposals in the NIST PQC competition include GeMSS
(specified in Casanova et al. (2020)), LUOV (specified in Beullens et
al. (2019)) and MQDSS (specified in Samardjiska et al. (2019)).
However, all three have been shown to be not secure in Tao et al.
(2021), Ding et al. (2021) and Kales and Zaverucha (2020),
respectively. Rainbow also suffered numerous attacks (Baena et al.
2022; Beullens 2021, 2022). The most serious attack by Beullens in
2022 vastly reduces the security of Rainbow, essentially breaking the
level 1 parameter sets. The use of GFNI for Rainbow was studied in
Drucker and Gueron (2020). Rainbow implementations on x86 were
studied in Chen et al. (2009). Bitsliced implementations of Rainbow

on the Cortex-M4 were studied in Chou et al. (2021). Constant-time
Gauss elimination was first described in Bernstein et al. (2013). The
only work studying side-channel attacks on Rainbow is Park et al.
(2018). Fault attacks on Rainbow and UOV were studied in Krämer
and Loiero (2019).
Section 11.3.3. The initial work on hash-based signatures by Lamport
is described in Lamport (1979) and the following constructions by
Winternitz and Merkle in Merkle (1990). The stateful signature
schemes XMSS and LMS have been introduced in Buchmann et al.
(2011) and Leighton and Micali (1995), and specified in IETF RFC
8391 (Hülsing et al. 2018) and RFC 8554 (McGrew et al. 2019). The
NIST PQC submission SPHINCS+ is specified in Hülsing et al.
(2020). Parallelized vector implementations are described in, for
example, Kölbl (2018) and Becker and Kannwischer (2022).
Embedded and hardware implementations of hash-based schemes are
provided in, for example, Wang et al. (2019) and Campos et al. (2020).
Side-channel analysis of hash-based schemes is described in, for
example, Kannwischer et al. (2018). Fault-attacks are described in
Castelnovi et al. (2018) and Genêt et al. (2018).
11.5. References
Abdulrahman, A., Hwang, V., Kannwischer, M.J., Sprenkels, D. (2022).
Faster Kyber and Dilithium on the Cortex-M4. In ACNS 22: 20th
International Conference on Applied Cryptography and Network
Security, Ateniese, G. and Venturi, D. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Aguilar Melchor, C., Aragon, N., Bettaieb, S., Bidoux, L., Blazy, O.,
Deneuville, J.-C., Gaborit, P., Hauteville, A., Zémor, G. (2017).
Ouroboros-R. Technical Report, National Institute of Standards and
Technology [Online]. Available at: https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-
quantum-cryptography/round-1-submissions.
Aguilar Melchor, C., Aragon, N., Bettaieb, S., Bidoux, L., Blazy, O.,
Deneuville, J.-C., Gaborit, P., Persichetti, E., Zémor, G., Bos, J. (2020).
HQC. Technical Report, National Institute of Standards and Technology

[Online]. Available at: https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-
cryptography/round-3-submissions.
Albrecht, M.R., Bernstein, D.J., Chou, T., Cid, C., Gilcher, J., Lange, T.,
Maram, V., von Maurich, I., Misoczki, R., Niederhagen, R. et al. (2020).
Classic McEliece. Technical Report, National Institute of Standards and
Technology [Online]. Available at: https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-
quantum-cryptography/round-3-submissions.
Alkim, E., Ducas, L., Pöppelmann, T., Schwabe, P. (2016). Post-quantum
key exchange: A new hope. In USENIX Security 2016: 25th USENIX
Security Symposium, Holz, T. and Savage, S. (eds). USENIX
Association, Austin, Texas.
Alkim, E., Bilgin, Y.A., Cenk, M., Gérard, F. (2020). Cortex-M4
optimizations for {R,M}LWE schemes. IACR Transactions on
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, 2020(3), 336–357.
Alkim, E., Cheng, D.Y.-L., Chung, C.-M.M., Evkan, H., Huang, L.W.-L.,
Hwang, V., Li, C.-L.T., Niederhagen, R., Shih, C.-J., Wälde, J. et al.
(2021). Polynomial multiplication in NTRU prime. IACR Transactions
on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, 2021(1), 217–238.
Almeida, J.B., Barbosa, M., Barthe, G., Grégoire, B., Laporte, V., Léchenet,
J.-C., Oliveira, T., Pacheco, H., Quaresma, M., Schwabe, P. et al. (2023).
Formally verifying Kyber part I: Implementation correctness. Paper
2023/215, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2023/215.
Aragon, N., Blazy, O., Deneuville, J.-C., Gaborit, P., Hauteville, A., Ruatta,
O., Tillich, J.-P., Zémor, G. (2017a). LAKE. Technical Report, National
Institute of Standards and Technology [Online]. Available at:
https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-cryptography/round-1-
submissions.
Aragon, N., Blazy, O., Deneuville, J.-C., Gaborit, P., Hauteville, A., Ruatta,
O., Tillich, J.-P., Zémor, G. (2017b). LOCKER. Technical Report,
National Institute of Standards and Technology [Online]. Available at:
https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-cryptography/round-1-
submissions.

Aragon, N., Blazy, O., Deneuville, J.-C., Gaborit, P., Hauteville, A., Ruatta,
O., Tillich, J.-P., Zémor, G., Aguilar Melchor, C., Bettaieb, S. et al.
(2019). ROLLO. Technical Report, National Institute of Standards and
Technology [Online]. Available at: https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-
quantum-cryptography/round-2-submissions.
Aragon, N., Barreto, P., Bettaieb, S., Bidoux, L., Blazy, O., Deneuville, J.-
C., Gaborit, P., Gueron, S., Guneysu, T., Aguilar Melchor, C.et al.
(2020). BIKE. Technical Report, National Institute of Standards and
Technology. Available at: https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-
cryptography/round-3-submissions.
Backlund, L., Ngo, K., Gürtner, J., Dubrova, E. (2022). Secret key recovery
attacks on masked and shuffled implementations of CRYSTALS-Kyber
and Saber. Report 2022/1692, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online].
Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/1692.
Baena, J., Briaud, P., Cabarcas, D., Perlner, R.A., Smith-Tone, D., Verbel,
J.A. (2022). Improving support-minors rank attacks: Applications to
GeMSS and Rainbow. In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2022,
Dodis, Y. and Shrimpton, T. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Baldi, M., Barenghi, A., Chiaraluce, F., Pelosi, G., Santini, P. (2019). A
finite regime analysis of information set decoding algorithms.
Algorithms, 12(10). doi: 10.3390/a12100209.
Barthe, G., Belaïd, S., Espitau, T., Fouque, P.-A., Grégoire, B., Rossi, M.,
Tibouchi, M. (2018). Masking the GLP lattice-based signature scheme at
any order. In Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2018, Nielsen,
J.B. and Rijmen, V. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Bauer, A., Gilbert, H., Renault, G., Rossi, M. (2019). Assessment of the
key-reuse resilience of NewHope. In Topics in Cryptology – CT-RSA
2019, Matsui, M. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Becker, H. and Kannwischer, M.J. (2022). Hybrid scalar/vector
implementations of Keccak and SPHINCS+ on AArch64. In Progress in
Cryptology - INDOCRYPT 2022, Isobe, T. and Sarkar, S. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.

Becker, A., Joux, A., May, A., Meurer, A. (2012). Decoding random binary
linear codes in 2n/20: How 1 + 1 = 0 improves information set decoding.
In Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2012, Pointcheval, D. and
Johansson, T. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Becker, H., Hwang, V., Kannwischer, M.J., Yang, B.-Y., Yang, S.-Y. (2021).
Neon NTT: Faster Dilithium, Kyber, and Saber on Cortex-a72 and Apple
M1. IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded
Systems, 2022(1), 221–244 [Online]. Available at:
https://tches.iacr.org/index.php/TCHES/article/view/929.
Beirendonck, M.V., D’Anvers, J., Karmakar, A., Balasch, J., Verbauwhede,
I. (2021). A side-channel-resistant implementation of SABER. ACM J.
Emerg. Technol. Comput. Syst., 17(2), 10:1–10:26.
Bernstein, D.J., Chou, T., Schwabe, P. (2013). McBits: Fast constant-time
code-based cryptography. In Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded
Systems – CHES 2013, Bertoni, G. and Coron, J.-S. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Bernstein, D.J., Chuengsatiansup, C., Lange, T., van Vredendaal, C. (2017).
NTRU Prime: Reducing attack surface at low cost. In SAC 2017: 24th
Annual International Workshop on Selected Areas in Cryptography,
Adams, C. and Camenisch, J. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Bernstein, D.J., De Feo, L., Leroux, A., Smith, S. (2020). Faster
computation of isogenies of large prime degree. ANTS, 4(1), 39–55.
Beullens, W. (2021). Improved cryptanalysis of UOV and Rainbow. In
Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2021, Canteaut, A. and
Standaert, F.-X. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Beullens, W. (2022). Breaking Rainbow takes a weekend on a laptop. In
Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2022, Dodis, Y. and Shrimpton, T.
(eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Beullens, W., Preneel, B., Szepieniec, A., Vercauteren, F. (2019). LUOV.
Technical Report. National Institute of Standards and Technology
[Online]. Available at: https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-
cryptography/round-2-submissions.

Bos, J., Ducas, L., Kiltz, E., Lepoint, T., Lyubashevsky, V., Schanck, J.M.,
Schwabe, P., Stehlé, D. (2018). CRYSTALS – Kyber: A CCA-secure
module-lattice-based KEM. In 2018 IEEE European Symposium on
Security and Privacy, EuroS&P 2018.
Bos, J.W., Gourjon, M., Renes, J., Schneider, T., van Vredendaal, C. (2021).
Masking Kyber: First- and higher-order implementations. IACR
Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems,
2021(4), 173–214.
Bruinderink, L.G. and Pessl, P. (2018). Differential fault attacks on
deterministic lattice signatures. IACR Transactions on Cryptographic
Hardware and Embedded Systems, 2018(3), 21–43.
Buchmann, J.A., Dahmen, E., Hülsing, A. (2011). XMSS – A practical
forward secure signature scheme based on minimal security
assumptions. In Post-Quantum Cryptography – 4th International
Workshop, PQCrypto 2011, Yang, B.-Y. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Campos, F., Kohlstadt, T., Reith, S., Stöttinger, M. (2020). LMS vs XMSS:
Comparison of stateful hash-based signature schemes on ARM Cortex-
M4. In AFRICACRYPT 20: 12th International Conference on
Cryptology in Africa, Nitaj, A. and Youssef, A.M. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Casanova, A., Faugère, J.-C., Macario-Rat, G., Patarin, J., Perret, L.,
Ryckeghem, J. (2020). GeMSS. Technical Report, National Institute of
Standards and Technology [Online]. Available at:
https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-cryptography/round-3-
submissions.
Castelnovi, L., Martinelli, A., Prest, T. (2018). Grafting trees: A fault attack
against the SPHINCS framework. In Post-Quantum Cryptography – 9th
International Conference, PQCrypto 2018, Lange, T. and Steinwandt, R.
(eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Castryck, W. and Decru, T. (2022). An efficient key recovery attack on
SIDH (preliminary version). Report 2022/975, Cryptology ePrint
Archive [Online]. Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/975.

Castryck, W., Lange, T., Martindale, C., Panny, L., Renes, J. (2018).
CSIDH: An efficient post-quantum commutative group action.
ASIACRYPT, 3, 395–427.
Charles, D.X., Lauter, K.E., Goren, E.Z. (2009). Cryptographic hash
functions from expander graphs. Journal of Cryptology, 22(1), 93–113.
Chen, M.-S. and Chou, T. (2021). Classic McEliece on the ARM Cortex-
M4. Report 2021/492, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/492.
Chen, A.I.-T., Chen, M.-S., Chen, T.-R., Cheng, C.-M., Ding, J., Kuo, E.L.-
H., Lee, F.Y.-S., Yang, B.-Y. (2009). SSE implementation of multivariate
PKCs on modern x86 CPUs. In Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded
Systems – CHES 2009, Clavier, C. and Gaj, K. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Chen, C., Danba, O., Hoffstein, J., Hülsing, A., Rijneveld, J., Schanck, J.M.,
Schwabe, P., Whyte, W., Zhang, Z., Saito, T. et al. (2020). NTRU.
Technical Report, National Institute of Standards and Technology
[Online]. Available at: https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-
cryptography/round-3-submissions.
Childs, A., Jao, D., Soukharev, V. (2014). Constructing elliptic curve
isogenies in quantum subexponential time. Journal of Mathematical
Cryptology, 8(1), 1–29. doi: 10.1515/jmc-2012-0016.
Chou, T. (2017). McBits revisited. In Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems – CHES 2017, Fischer, W. and Homma, N. (eds).
Springer, Heidelberg.
Chou, T., Kannwischer, M.J., Yang, B.-Y. (2021). Rainbow on Cortex-M4.
IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems,
2021(4), 650–675.
Chung, C.-M.M., Hwang, V., Kannwischer, M.J., Seiler, G., Shih, C.-J.,
Yang, B.-Y. (2021). NTT multiplication for NTT-unfriendly rings. IACR
Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems,
2021(2), 159–188.

Couveignes, J.-M. (2006). Hard homogeneous spaces. Report 2006/291,
Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2006/291.
D’Anvers, J.-P., Tiepelt, M., Vercauteren, F., Verbauwhede, I. (2019).
Timing attacks on error correcting codes in post-quantum schemes. In
Proceedings of ACM Workshop on Theory of Implementation Security,
Bilgin, B., Petkova-Nikova, S., Rijmen, V. (eds). ACM, New York.
D’Anvers, J.-P., Karmakar, A., Roy, S.S., Vercauteren, F., Mera, J.M.B.,
Beirendonck, M.V., Basso, A. (2020). SABER. Technical Report,
National Institute of Standards and Technology [Online]. Available at:
https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-cryptography/round-3-
submissions.
D’Anvers, J.-P., Van Beirendonck, M., Verbauwhede, I. (2023). Revisiting
higher-order masked comparison for lattice-based cryptography:
Algorithms and bit-sliced implementations. IEEE Transactions on
Computers, 72(2), 321–332.
De Feo, L., Jao, D., Plût, J. (2014). Towards quantum-resistant
cryptosystems from supersingular elliptic curve isogenies. J. Math.
Cryptol. 8(3), 209–247.
De Feo, L., Kohel, D., Leroux, A., Petit, C., Wesolowski, B. (2020).
SQISign: Compact post-quantum signatures from quaternions and
isogenies. ASIACRYPT, 1, 64–93.
Delvaux, J. and Merino Del Pozo, S. (2021). Roulette: Breaking Kyber with
diverse fault injection setups. Report 2021/1622, Cryptology ePrint
Archive [Online]. Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/1622.
Ding, J. and Schmidt, D. (2005). Rainbow, a new multivariable polynomial
signature scheme. In ACNS 05: 3rd International Conference on Applied
Cryptography and Network Security, Ioannidis, J., Keromytis, A., Yung,
M. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Ding, J., Yang, B.-Y., Chen, C.-H. O., Chen, M.-S., Cheng, C.-M. (2008).
New differential-algebraic attacks and reparametrization of Rainbow. In
ACNS 08: 6th International Conference on Applied Cryptography and

Network Security, Bellovin, S.M., Gennaro, R., Keromytis, A.D., Yung,
M. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Ding, J., Chen, M.-S., Petzoldt, A., Schmidt, D., Yang, B.-Y., Kannwischer,
M., Patarin, J. (2020). Rainbow. Technical Report, National Institute of
Standards and Technology [Online]. Available at:
https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-cryptography/round-3-
submissions.
Ding, J., Deaton, J., Vishakha, Yang, B.-Y. (2021). The nested subset
differential attack – A practical direct attack against LUOV which forges
a signature within 210 minutes. In Advances in Cryptology –
EUROCRYPT 2021, Canteaut, A. and Standaert, F.-X. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Drucker, N. and Gueron, S. (2020). Speed up over the Rainbow. Report
2020/408, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/408.
Dubrova, E., Ngo, K., Gärtner, J. (2022). Breaking a fifth-order masked
implementation of CRYSTALS-Kyber by copy-paste. IACR Cryptol.
ePrint Arch. [Online]. Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/1713.
Ducas, L., Kiltz, E., Lepoint, T., Lyubashevsky, V., Schwabe, P., Seiler, G.,
Stehlé, D. (2018). CRYSTALS-Dilithium: A lattice-based digital
signature scheme. IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems, 2018(1), 238–268.
Esser, A. and Bellini, E. (2021). Syndrome decoding estimator. Report
2021/1243, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/1243.
Finiasz, M. and Sendrier, N. (2009). Security bounds for the design of code-
based cryptosystems. In Advances in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2009,
Matsui, M. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Fluhrer, S. (2016). Cryptanalysis of ring-LWE based key exchange with key
share reuse. Report 2016/085, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online].
Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/085.

Fujisaki, E. and Okamoto, T. (1999). Secure integration of asymmetric and
symmetric encryption schemes. In Advances in Cryptology –
CRYPTO’99, Wiener, M.J. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Genêt, A., Kannwischer, M.J., Pelletier, H., McLauchlan, A. (2018).
Practical fault injection attacks on SPHINCS. Report 2018/674,
Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/674.
Greconici, D.O.C., Kannwischer, M.J., Sprenkels, D. (2021). Compact
Dilithium implementations on Cortex-M3 and Cortex-M4. IACR
Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems,
2021(1), 1–24.
Güneysu, T., Lyubashevsky, V., Pöppelmann, T. (2012). Practical lattice-
based cryptography: A signature scheme for embedded systems. In
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems – CHES 2012, Prouff,
E. and Schaumont, P. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Guo, Q., Hlauschek, C., Johansson, T., Lahr, N., Nilsson, A., Schröder, R.L.
(2022). Don’t reject this: Key-recovery timing attacks due to rejection-
sampling in HQC and BIKE. IACR Trans. Cryptogr. Hardw. Embed.
Syst., 2022(3), 223–263.
Hamburg, M., Hermelink, J., Primas, R., Samardjiska, S., Schamberger, T.,
Streit, S., Strieder, E., van Vredendaal, C. (2021). Chosen ciphertext k-
trace attacks on masked CCA2 secure Kyber. IACR Transactions on
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, 2021(4), 88–113.
Heinz, D. and Pöppelmann, T. (2022). Combined fault and DPA protection
for lattice-based cryptography. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 72(4),
1055–1066.
Heinz, D., Kannwischer, M.J., Land, G., Pöppelmann, T., Schwabe, P.,
Sprenkels, D. (2022). First-order masked Kyber on ARM Cortex-M4.
Report 2022/058, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/058.
Hermelink, J., Pessl, P., Pöppelmann, T. (2021). Fault-enabled chosen-
ciphertext attacks on Kyber. In Progress in Cryptology – INDOCRYPT

2021 – 22nd International Conference on Cryptology, Adhikari, A.,
Küsters, R., Preneel, B. (eds). Springer, Cham.
Hoffstein, J., Pipher, J., Silverman, J.H. (1998). NTRU: A ring-based public
key cryptosystem. In Third Algorithmic Number Theory Symposium
(ANTS). Springer, Heidelberg.
Hoffstein, J., Howgrave-Graham, N., Pipher, J., Silverman, J.H., Whyte, W.
(2003). NTRUSIGN: Digital signatures using the NTRU lattice. In
Topics in Cryptology – CT-RSA 2003, Joye, M. (ed.). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Hofheinz, D., Hövelmanns, K., Kiltz, E. (2017). A modular analysis of the
Fujisaki–Okamoto transformation. In TCC 2017: 15th Theory of
Cryptography Conference, Kalai, Y. and Reyzin, L. (eds). Springer,
Heidelberg.
Hülsing, A., Butin, D., Gazdag, S.-L., Rijneveld, J., Mohaisen, A. (2018).
XMSS: eXtended Merkle Signature Scheme. RFC 8391. Internet
Research Task Force (IRTF) [Online]. Available at: https://www.rfc-
editor.org/info/rfc8391.
Hülsing, A., Bernstein, D.J., Dobraunig, C., Eichlseder, M., Fluhrer, S.,
Gazdag, S.-L., Kampanakis, P., Kolbl, S., Lange, T., Lauridsen, M.M. et
al. (2020). SPHINCS+. Technical Report, National Institute of Standards
and Technology [Online]. Available at:
https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-cryptography/round-3-
submissions.
Hwang, V., Liu, J., Seiler, G., Shi, X., Tsai, M.-H., Wang, B.-Y., Yang, B.-Y.
(2022). Verified NTT multiplications for NISTPQC KEM lattice
finalists: Kyber, SABER, and NTRU. IACR Transactions on
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, 2022(4), 718–750.
Jao, D. and De Feo, L. (2011). Towards quantum-resistant cryptosystems
from supersingular elliptic curve isogenies. In Post-Quantum
Cryptography – 4th International Workshop, PQCrypto 2011, Yang, B.-
Y. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.

Jao, D., Azarderakhsh, R., Campagna, M., Costello, C., De Feo, L., Hess,
B., Jalali, A., Koziel, B., LaMacchia, B., Longa, P. et al. (2020). SIKE.
Technical Report, National Institute of Standards and Technology
[Online]. Available at: https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-
cryptography/round-3-submissions.
Kales, D. and Zaverucha, G. (2020). An attack on some signature schemes
constructed from five-pass identification schemes. In CANS 20: 19th
International Conference on Cryptology and Network Security, Krenn,
S., Shulman, H., Vaudenay, S. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Kamucheka, T., Nelson, A., Andrews, D., Huang, M. (2022). A masked
pure-hardware implementation of Kyber cryptographic algorithm.
Report 2022/1547, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/1547.
Kannwischer, M.J., Genêt, A., Butin, D., Krämer, J., Buchmann, J. (2018).
Differential power analysis of XMSS and SPHINCS. In COSADE 2018:
9th International Workshop on Constructive Side-Channel Analysis and
Secure Design, Fan, J. and Gierlichs, B. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Kannwischer, M.J., Rijneveld, J., Schwabe, P. (2019). Faster multiplication
in 
 on Cortex-M4 to speed up NIST PQC candidates. In ACNS
19: 17th International Conference on Applied Cryptography and
Network Security, Deng, R.H. Gauthier-Umaña, V., Ochoa, M., Yung, M.
(eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Karmakar, A., Mera, J.M.B., Roy, S.S., Verbauwhede, I. (2018). Saber on
ARM. IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded
Systems, 2018(3), 243–266.
Kipnis, A. and Shamir, A. (1998). Cryptanalysis of the oil & vinegar
signature scheme. In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO’98, Krawczyk,
H. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Kipnis, A., Patarin, J., Goubin, L. (1999). Unbalanced oil and vinegar
signature schemes. In Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT’99,
Stern, J. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.

Kölbl, S. (2018). Putting wings on SPHINCS. In Post-Quantum
Cryptography – 9th International Conference, PQCrypto 2018, Lange,
T. and Steinwandt, R. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Krämer, J. and Loiero, M. (2019). Fault attacks on UOV and Rainbow. In
COSADE 2019: 10th International Workshop on Constructive Side-
Channel Analysis and Secure Design, Polian, I. and Stöttinger, M. (eds).
Springer, Heidelberg.
Kundu, S., D’Anvers, J., Beirendonck, M.V., Karmakar, A., Verbauwhede,
I. (2022). Higher-order masked Saber. In Security and Cryptography for
Networks – 13th International Conference, SCN 2022, Galdi, C. and
Jarecki, S. (eds). Springer, Cham. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-14791-3_5.
Lamport, L. (1979). Constructing digital signatures from a one-way
function. Technical Report, SRI-CSL-98. SRI International Computer
Science Laboratory, California.
Lee, P.J. and Brickell, E.F. (1988). An observation on the security of
McEliece’s public-key cryptosystem. In Advances in Cryptology –
EUROCRYPT’88, Günther, C.G. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Leighton, F.T. and Micali, S. (1995). Large provably fast and secure digital
signature schemes based on secure hash functions. U.S. Patent
5,432,852.
Lyubashevsky, V. (2009). Fiat-Shamir with aborts: Applications to lattice
and factoring-based signatures. In Advances in Cryptology –
ASIACRYPT 2009, Matsui, M. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Lyubashevsky, V., Peikert, C., Regev, O. (2010). On ideal lattices and
learning with errors over rings. In Advances in Cryptology –
EUROCRYPT 2010, Gilbert, H. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Lyubashevsky, V., Peikert, C., Regev, O. (2013). On ideal lattices and
learning with errors over rings. Journal of the ACM, 60(6), 43:1–43:35.
Lyubashevsky, V., Ducas, L., Kiltz, E., Lepoint, T., Schwabe, P., Seiler, G.,
Stehlé, D., Bai, S. (2020). CRYSTALS-DILITHIUM. Technical Report,
National Institute of Standards and Technology [Online]. Available at:

https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-quantum-cryptography/round-3-
submissions.
Maino, L. and Martindale, C. (2022). An attack on SIDH with arbitrary
starting curve. Report 2022/1026, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online].
Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/1026.
Matsumoto, T. and Imai, H. (1988). Public quadratic polynominal-tuples for
efficient signature-verification and message-encryption. In Advances in
Cryptology – EUROCRYPT’88, Günther, C.G. (ed.). Springer,
Heidelberg.
McEliece, R.J. (1978). A public-key cryptosystem based on algebraic
coding theory. Progress Report 42-44, Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
California Institute of Technology [Online]. Available at:
https://ipnpr.jpl.nasa.gov/progressReport2/42-44/44N.PDF.
McGrew, D., Curcio, M., Fluhrer, S. (2019). Leighton-Micali hash-based
signatures. RFC Editor, 8554 [Online]. Available at: https://www.rfc-
editor.org/info/rfc8554.
Merkle, R.C. (1990). A certified digital signature. In Advances in
Cryptology – CRYPTO’89, Brassard, G. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Migliore, V., Gérard, B., Tibouchi, M., Fouque, P.-A. (2019). Masking
Dilithium: Efficient implementation and side-channel evaluation. Report
2019/394, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/394.
Ngo, K., Dubrova, E., Guo, Q., Johansson, T. (2021). A side-channel attack
on a masked IND-CCA secure Saber KEM implementation. IACR
Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems,
2021(4), 676–707.
Ngo, K., Wang, R., Dubrova, E., Paulsrud, N. (2022). Side-channel attacks
on lattice-based KEMs are not prevented by higher-order masking.
Report 2022/919, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/919.

Niederreiter, H. (1986). Knapsack-type cryptosystems and algebraic coding
theory. Problems of Control and Information Theory, 15(2), 159–166.
Oder, T., Schneider, T., Pöppelmann, T., Güneysu, T. (2018). Practical
CCA2-secure masked Ring-LWE implementations. IACR Transactions
on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, 2018(1), 142–174.
Park, A., Shim, K.-A., Koo, N., Han, D.-G. (2018). Side-channel attacks on
post-quantum signature schemes based on multivariate quadratic
equations. IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems, 2018(3), 500–523.
Patarin, J. (1995). Cryptanalysis of the Matsumoto and Imai public key
scheme of eurocrypt’88. In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO’95,
Coppersmith, D. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg.
Patarin, J. (1996). Hidden fields equations (HFE) and isomorphisms of
polynomials (IP): Two new families of asymmetric algorithms. In
Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT’96, Maurer, U.M. (ed.).
Springer, Heidelberg.
Patarin, J. (1997). The oil and vinegar algorithm for signatures. Dagstuhl
Workshop on Cryptography.
Pessl, P. and Prokop, L. (2021). Fault attacks on CCA-secure lattice KEMs.
IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems,
2021(2), 37–60.
Prange, E. (1962). The use of information sets in decoding cyclic codes.
IRE Transactions on Information Theory, 8(5), 5–9.
Prest, T., Fouque, P.-A., Hoffstein, J., Kirchner, P., Lyubashevsky, V.,
Pornin, T., Ricosset, T., Seiler, G., Whyte, W., Zhang, Z. (2020).
FALCON. Technical Report, National Institute of Standards and
Technology [Online]. Available at: https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-
quantum-cryptography/round-3-submissions.
Qin, Y., Cheng, C., Zhang, X., Pan, Y., Hu, L., Ding, J. (2021). A systematic
approach and analysis of key mismatch attacks on lattice-based NIST

candidate KEMs. In Advances in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2021,
Tibouchi, M. and Wang, H. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Ravi, P., Chattopadhyay, A., Baksi, A. (2022). Side-channel and fault-
injection attacks over lattice-based post-quantum schemes (Kyber,
Dilithium): Survey and new results. Report 2022/737, Cryptology ePrint
Archive [Online]. Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/737.
Regev, O. (2005). On lattices, learning with errors, random linear codes,
and cryptography. In 37th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
Computing, Gabow, H.N. and Fagin, R. (eds). ACM Press, Baltimore.
Regev, O. (2009). On lattices, learning with errors, random linear codes,
and cryptography. Journal of the ACM, 56(6), 34.
Robert, D. (2022). Breaking SIDH in polynomial time. Report 2022/1038,
Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online]. Available at:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/1038.
Rostovtsev, A. and Stolbunov, A. (2006). Public-key cryptosystem based on
isogenies. Report 2006/145, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online].
Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2006/145.
Samardjiska, S., Chen, M.-S., Hülsing, A., Rijneveld, J., Schwabe, P.
(2019). MQDSS. Technical Report, National Institute of Standards and
Technology [Online]. Available at: https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/post-
quantum-cryptography/round-2-submissions.
Schwabe, P., Avanzi, R., Bos, J., Ducas, L., Kiltz, E., Lepoint, T.,
Lyubashevsky, V., Schanck, J.M., Seiler, G., Stehlé, D.et al. (2022).
CRYSTALS-KYBER. Technical Report, National Institute of Standards
and Technology [Online]. Available at:
https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/post-quantum-cryptography/selected-
algorithms-2022.
Seiler, G. (2018). Faster AVX2 optimized NTT multiplication for ring-LWE
lattice cryptography. Report 2018/039, Cryptology ePrint Archive
[Online]. Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/039.

Stern, J. (1988). A method for finding codewords of small weight. In
Coding Theory and Applications, 3rd International Colloquium, Cohen,
G.D. and Wolfmann, J. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Tao, C., Petzoldt, A., Ding, J. (2021). Efficient key recovery for all HFE
signature variants. In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2021, Malkin,
T. and Peikert, C. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Wang, W., Szefer, J., Niederhagen, R. (2017). FPGA-based key generator
for the Niederreiter cryptosystem using binary Goppa codes. In
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems – CHES 2017, Fischer,
W. and Homma, N. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Wang, W., Szefer, J., Niederhagen, R. (2018). FPGA-based Niederreiter
cryptosystem using binary Goppa codes. In Post-Quantum Cryptography
– 9th International Conference, PQCrypto 2018, Lange, T. and
Steinwandt, R. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
Wang, W., Jungk, B., Wälde, J., Deng, S., Gupta, N., Szefer, J.,
Niederhagen, R. (2019). XMSS and embedded systems. In SAC 2019:
26th Annual International Workshop on Selected Areas in Cryptography,
Paterson, K.G. and Stebila, D. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
OceanofPDF.com

PART 3
Hardware Security
OceanofPDF.com

12
Hardware Reverse Engineering and Invasive
Attacks
Sergei SKOROBOGATOV
Cambridge Research and Engineering, United Kingdom
12.1. Introduction
Security in many modern systems rely on the underlying hardware when it
comes to authentication, secrecy and integrity. This became especially
important for modern IoT devices. Most of these are based on
semiconductor devices fabricated on a single piece of silicon. It is important
that these devices are designed in a way that even if their software is
compromised, it should not be possible to overtake their control. To achieve
that, both authentication and key management should be performed deeply
inside their hardware. Examples of such devices include microcontrollers,
FPGAs, SoCs and smartcards. In rare cases, custom designed hardware is
built to further improve the hardware security. However, even in that case, it
is likely to be based on a standard family of existing devices. Ultimately, in
order to understand the security of the hardware features implemented
inside silicon, at least partial reverse engineering of the internal structure is
required.
12.2. Preparation for hardware attacks
Physical attacks require direct access to the device of interest. That assumes
either access to the PCB components for establishing an electrical contact,
opening IC packages for accessing silicon die or removing the components
from the PCB for placing them into a specialized environment. The latter
could be a custom test board, special harness for microscopy or dedicated
holder for mechanical polishing.

12.2.1. Preparation at PCB level
Some devices built with physical security in mind, for example, certified to
FIPS 140-2 Level 3 standard will most likely be encapsulated into epoxy
compound and placed inside a robust metal case to prevent physical access
to their internal parts. In order to access those electronic components, the
metal case must be first mechanically removed before the PCB can be
cleaned from the epoxy. If plastic cases could be easily opened with a knife
or a screwdriver, then metal cases require cutting blades, edge drill bits or a
CNC machine. The example of FIPS140-2 certified device, Kingston
IronKey D300 and its PCB encapsulated in the epoxy compound are
presented in Figure 12.1.
Figure 12.1. IronKey device before and after opening its metal case
There are several ways how the cured epoxy compound could be removed
from the surface:
Mechanical methods involve applying a force, for example, using
pliers, vice or awl. Very often, it will break off at the PCB surface or
from the IC package. However, in case of small SMD packages, there
is a high chance that some PCB components will stick to the epoxy
and go off the PCB. It might be easier to control the amount of
material being removed using engraving tools or a CNC machine.
There is still a danger of damaging PCB components or copper tracks.
Structural strength of cured epoxy deteriorates quickly at temperatures
above 150°C (302°F). Some compounds become soft like a rubber and

could be easily removed with a toothpick or needle. That way, the
epoxy can be easily peeled off plastic packages of the PCB
components. However, some epoxy compounds do not soften even at
300°C (572°F), though their mechanical strength deteriorates and they
become very brittle. Hence, the epoxy could be easily removed using a
needle or blade. The danger of heating up the epoxy above 250°C
(482°F) is associated with displacing PCB components since the solder
melts at this temperature. If the epoxy is heated above 400°C (752°F),
the components and PCB itself could be damaged as they both contain
epoxy inside. For precise removal of small amounts of epoxy, we
could use a soldering iron with a copper tip. By choosing the right tip
size, applying certain force and controlling the temperature, the
removal process could be easily adjusted.
Cured epoxy could be softened by various chemicals such as acids,
alkalines and organic solvents. After a certain time, it could be scraped
off or easily removed with a blade, toothpick or needle. The best
chemical for removing cured epoxy is nitric acid; however, it also
corrodes PCB especially copper tracks and solder mask. Strong
alkaline such as hot sodium hydroxide solution will corrode cured
epoxy but at a much slower rate. It will also affect PCB material and
IC packages. Organic solvents could work quite well and they are
usually used in the industry for stripping off old paint. Some solvents
could pose a significant health risk and can only be used under a
controlled environment.
Other methods for removing cured epoxy involve laser ablation and
microwave induced plasma, which is widely used in the failure
analysis industry. By combining different methods, the epoxy
compound can be removed very efficiently without affecting
functionality of a device. The result of the epoxy removal from
encapsulated PCB is presented in Figure 12.2.

Figure 12.2. IronKey device before and after epoxy removal.
Once PCB is clear from any epoxy compound, its electronic components
could be identified. This enables us to locate major components like
microcontroller or FPGA, smaller ICs like USB controller and power
regulators, and small components like capacitors, resistors, diodes and
transistors.
Passive components such as resistors (white ceramic base with black top
paint), capacitors (gray or brown ceramic package) and inductors (dark
brown ceramic package) could be easily spotted. It is not always easy to
distinguish between capacitors and inductors, but any digital multimeter can
help. Inductors have resistance close to zero and capacitors have almost
infinite resistance. The actual values of the components such as resistors,
capacitors and inductors could be measured with an LCR meter.
Most 2-pin, 3-pin or even 4-pin devices are likely to be diodes and
transistors. Small packages will be marked with SMD/SMT (surface-mount
device/technology) codes because their full name will not fit within a small
area. Their markings could be checked against SMD marking tables
available from various providers. In some cases, the real name of a
component could be found by a simple search on the Internet. Larger
components are usually marked with a manufacturer’s logo and real name
of the device under which they could be found on the manufacturer’s
website.
Identification becomes more challenging if the IC has custom marking.
There could be two outcomes – either the manufacturer decided to disguise
the real name of the device or it is actually a custom made IC chip. The

former could be bypassed by IC decapsulation and looking at the silicon die
markings under an optical microscope. In most cases, the real name of the
device will be clearly marked there. However, in small number of cases,
there could still be factory custom markings even on standard chips. In this
case, the device could be identified by its functionality and pinout. In a
worst case scenario, some possible candidates could be ordered from
distributors, decapsulated and compared with the chip in question. Usual
places to look for SMD codes of the components are manufacturers’
websites and SMD books.
The final step with the PCB analysis is creating a schematic of the device.
In order to reconstruct the circuit diagram of the device, we need to trace all
the wires on the PCB that connect all the components together. In the case
of PCBs with only two layers, this process is tedious, but relatively
straightforward. First, all the electronic components must be removed by
desoldering them using a hot air gun at about 300°C and removing with
tweezers or a blade. Then the remaining solder needs to be removed with a
hot desoldering braid. Finally, the PCB has to be cleaned with a solvent and
dried up. All the connection wires become clearly visible and easily
traceable (Figure 12.3). In case of PCBs with four or more layers, each
layer will need to be separated, for example, through a polishing process,
then individually photographed before the overall picture is created (Figure
12.4). An alternative way of creating a 3D structure of the PCB that does
not even require desoldering of components is an X-ray CT (computerized
tomography) scan. It takes multiple images at different angles around the
device and uses computer processing to reconstruct its 3D structure. Once
the 3D image is created, each PCB layer could be individually focused at
making wire tracing much easier (Figure 12.5). Then, the circuit diagram
can be manually created from those PCB images using one of the CAD
layout software tools, for example, Eagle from Autodesk.

Figure 12.3. Omnipod PCB before and after components removal.
Figure 12.4. eMMC package carrier at different depth of polishing.
The circuit diagram or schematic of the device could help in identifying
interconnections between ICs and spot any debug ports. The former could
be useful for eavesdropping on communication protocols, while the latter
might become useful for reverse engineering and firmware extraction.
Some PCBs could contain dedicated test pads, leading to standard debug
interfaces such as JTAG and SWD. Standard components like
microcontrollers and FPGAs are likely to have well-documented debug
pins. Those are likely to be the usual points of interest on the way to reverse
engineering and better understanding the device functionality.
12.2.2. Preparation at component level
Sample preparation depends on the subsequent attack methods. Desoldering
components and placing them on a test board is sufficient for most non-
invasive attacks. These attacks are low cost as only moderately
sophisticated equipment is required. In addition, they usually do not leave
any tamper evidence as there is no physical harm to the device made during

these attacks. The examples of non-invasive attacks include playing around
with the supply voltage and clock signal in the form of power and clock
glitching as this, for example, could affect the decoding and execution of
individual CPU instructions. Another example is power analysis, in which
we measure the fluctuations in the current consumed by the device. This
allows various instructions and processed data to be clearly distinguished,
leading to the extraction of secrets. Other examples of non-invasive attacks
are timing attacks when the computation time is data dependent,
eavesdropping on communication to acquire useful information, data
injection into protocols to cause certain disruption, brute-forcing weak
passwords and secret keys. A typical sample prepared for non-invasive
attack is shown in Figure 12.6 with the chip in the ZIF socket on a test
board for convenience.

Figure 12.5. Four PCB layers extracted with X-ray CT of Infineon Trust B
evaluation kit
Figure 12.6. Device prepared for non-invasive attack.
Invasive and semi-invasive attacks start with the removal of a chip package

to access its silicon die. Once the chip is opened, it is possible to perform
probing or modification attacks. The most important tool for invasive
attacks is a microprobing workstation. We have to remove at least part of
the passivation layer before probes can establish contact. This could be
done by etching, milling or by using a laser cutter. Plastic package material
could be removed using chemical methods, typically with hot fuming nitric
acid, or mechanically using precision CNC machines. Laser ablation can
also be used for precise removal of plastic material, while preserving
delicate bonding wires. However, its combination with microwave-induced
plasma (MIP) decapsulation gives the best result in terms of speed and
cleanliness of the surface.
Although chemical methods allow partial removal of the package material
while preserving the device functionality, special attention must be paid to
chips which use copper and silver for bonding wires. Unlike aluminum and
gold wires (Figure 12.7), they will be quickly dissolved in fuming nitric
acid. However, when a mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids is used, the wires
will be preserved from dissolving (Figure 12.8). The alternative to chemical
methods could be in using mechanical polishing followed by restoring the
bonding wires with conductive paint, or in some cases the die of interest
could require new connections to be established, which can be
accomplished by soldering (Figure 12.9). For more sophisticated tasks, the
new bonding wires could be established using wire bonding machines.
Figure 12.7. Decapsulated dies with Aluminum and gold wires.
All invasive attacks are quite complicated. They require hours or weeks in a
specialized laboratory and, in the process, they destroy the package or even

the device. In addition, invasive attacks require highly qualified specialists
and a proper budget.
Figure 12.8. Decapsulated die with copper wires.
Figure 12.9. Decapsulated dies bonded after invasive preparation.
Semi-invasive attacks could be performed using such tools as UV light, X-
rays and other sources of ionizing radiation, lasers and electromagnetic
fields. They can be used individually or in conjunction with each other.
Modern deep sub-micron semiconductor chips have multiple metal layers.
Therefore, it is easier to approach their active area from the rear side of the
bulk silicon substrate. For that, only part of the package that covers the bulk
silicon needs to be mechanically removed, for example, using inexpensive
engraving tools. Then, the laser could be directly focused through the
silicon at the logic area or memory array. Electromagnetic pulses could also
be applied from the rear side, thus injecting controllable faults. Although

semi-invasive attacks are harder to implement as they require depackaging
of the chip, very much less expensive equipment is needed than for invasive
attacks. Also, these attacks can be performed in a reasonably short time. An
example of the chip prepared for laser fault injection is presented in Figure
12.10.
Figure 12.10. Device prepared for semi-invasive attack.
12.2.3. Preparation at silicon level
Most invasive attacks will require manipulations with the silicon die. This
could be partial decapsulation for subsequent probing attacks or full
decapsulation for subsequent reverse engineering. This is normally
achieved with a pre-heated fuming nitric acid applied to a device through an
aperture or stencil. For improving efficiency of laser fault injection attacks,
the bulk silicon substrate of the die could be thinned from the usual 300 μm
down to 20 μm or even less. For some packages, like flip-chip, this can be

achieved by thinning the substrate on a lapping machine (Figure 12.11). The
remaining thickness of the silicon must be controlled to avoid removing
excessive material and permanently damaging the device. However,
thinning silicon substrate down to approximately 2 μm is relatively safe for
most modern CMOS devices. The most challenging packages for substrate
thinning are BGA and QFN, where polishing will result in the removal of
balls or pins within the package. For such packages, the substrate material
must be selectively removed using specialized precision CNC machines.
More precise polishing is required for deprocessing by removal of a specific
number of internal layers inside the silicon die. For that more expensive
lapping and CMP (chemical-mechanical polishing), machines should be
used.
In silicon chips, the top-layer aluminum interconnect lines are covered by a
passivation layer which needs to be removed before the probes can establish
contact. The most convenient and easy-to-use passivation layer removing
technique involves a laser cutting system. The system consists of the laser
head mounted on the camera port of a microscope and the submicron-
precision stage to move the sample. Such laser cutters can be bought
second-hand at affordable cost.

Figure 12.11. Thinning substrate on lapping machine.
For modern chips with more than three metal layers or smaller than 0.35 μm
fabrication process, more sophisticated tools such as focused ion beam
(FIB) workstation have to be used. Although such equipment is expensive
and require a lot of maintenance, these systems are widely used by
universities across the world in physics, material science and engineering.
12.3. Probing attacks
Probing is used not only for signal observation or eavesdropping, but also to
inject faults and new data. In some cases, this could be performed at a PCB
level by soldering directly to the tracks or to IC pins. For example, if the
debug interface is not wired to any connector, it could be custom built
(Figure 12.12).

Figure 12.12. Debug interface wired to the microcontroller.
Figure 12.13. Probing station (a) and probing needles landed on the chip
surface (b).

A microprobing station is one of the most important tools for invasive
attacks. It consists of five elements: a microscope, stage, device test socket,
micro-manipulators and probe tips. The microscope must have long
working distance objectives – sufficient enough to accommodate six to
eight probe tips (Figure 12.13) between the sample and the objective lens. It
should also have enough depth of focus to follow the probe tip movement.
For simple applications, a manually controlled probing station is enough.
Passive probe tips are very cheap (only a few dollars), but active probes are
quite expensive (over a hundred dollars); however, they can easily be built
from an operational amplifier and a passive tip soldered directly to its input.
Some chips have additional debug interfaces which are not connected to
any pins. In this case, the decapsulated device can be placed on a probing
station and then all the necessary connections to the debug port established
with probing tips.
Usually, to extract the information such as memory contents or a secret key,
microprobing is applied to the internal CPU data bus. It is difficult to
observe the whole bus at a time in one go and various techniques can be
used to overcome this. For instance, the same transaction or memory read
operation can be repeated many times and then two to four probes are used
to observe the signals, which are then combined into a complete bus trace.
In order to establish a contact with internal wires, the insulation above them
must be removed. For that, a laser cutter can be used with 100× objective
lens. However, it is only practical to remove the insulation layer above the
top metal layer. Therefore, all data bus lines have to be traced to their
presence in the top metal layer. Then, probing needles can be placed on all
eight data bus lines using micropositioners of the probing station. The view
on the chip surface under the probing station’s microscope with the probing
needles landed on the data bus is presented in Figure 12.14. By injecting
certain data into the data bus and observing the response from CPU, it was
possible to bypass data bus encryption and inject an arbitrary code for
execution. Modern chips fabricated with deep sub-micron processes and
multiple metal layers would require sophisticated tools like FIB to establish
a contact with internal wires and bring a test point to the surface (Figure
12.15).

Figure 12.14. Probing tips landed on the data bus of the chip.
Figure 12.15. Optical and SEM images of test points created under FIB.

More sophisticated tools like FIB workstations can be used to perform
attacks. FIB workstations simplify manual probing of deep metal and
polysilicon lines. They can also be used for modification of the chip
structure by cutting wires and creating new interconnect lines.
12.4. Delayering and reverse engineering
Another approach to understand how particular chip works is to reverse
engineer it. The first step is to create a map of a new processor. It could be
done by using a microscope to produce high-resolution photographs of the
chip surface. The attacker has to be familiar with CMOS VLSI design
techniques and chip architectures, but the necessary knowledge is easily
available from numerous textbooks. Deeper layers can only be recognized
in a second series of photographs after the metal layers have been stripped
off, which can be achieved by chemical etching or by polishing the chip’s
die with a CMP machine.
There are two main applications of deprocessing. One is to remove the
passivation layer, exposing the top metal layer for microprobing attacks.
Another is to gain access to the deep layers and observe the internal
structure of the chip. The best way to understand the functionality of a chip
is to reverse engineer it. However, in practice, this process is very tedious
and time consuming. Although all transistors, diodes and passive
components inside the device are in the same planar layer, all
interconnections between them are usually located in multiple metal layers
and a polysilicon layer. In old chips, it was possible to see all the layers
under an optical microscope as there were usually only one or two metal
layers, while the fabrication process was above 0.5 μm. High-resolution
optical microscopes allow each layer to be brought into focus while blurring
out-of-focal-plane features. That way, the internal layers could be imaged
without deprocessing. In modern chips with more than three metal layers,
each layer must be individually exposed for imaging. The imaging itself is
usually done with a scanning electron microscope (SEM) because optical
microscopes cannot provide resolution better than 100 nm, while even entry
level SEMs could offer 10 nm resolution. However, SEMs are not good for
imaging structures well below the surface without seriously compromising
on the resolution. Therefore, only a single metal layer exposed to the

surface could be imaged under SEM with vias going to the next layer
imaged at a higher acceleration voltage. As a result, each chip must be
deprocessed to each metal layer, then to its polysilicon layer and finally to
the transistor layer for taking high-resolution photographs under SEM.
There are different deprocessing methods, each having their own pros and
cons.
12.4.1. Chemical deprocessing
Conductive layers that form the signal wires inside the chip are made from
aluminum or copper for top layers and polysilicon for the bottom layer.
Interconnects between layers, called vias, could contain aluminum, copper,
tungsten, titanium, silicides and nitrides. A passivation layer that protects
the whole structure from moisture and air is at the very top and is usually
made from silicon oxide or nitride. Inside plastic packages, the passivation
layer is often covered with a polymer layer, usually polyimide, to protect
against sharp grains in the compound during the package formation.
In wet chemical etching, each layer is removed by specific chemicals and
this allows good selectivity over different materials. For example, a silicon
dioxide insulation layer could be selectively removed without an etching
metal layer. However, its downside is in the isotropic nature of the process
that is uniformity in all directions. This produces unwanted undercutting. As
a result, narrow metal lines will have a tendency to lift off the surface
(Figure 12.16). Isotropic etching also leads to etching through holes such as
vias, resulting in unwanted etching of underlying wires. In addition, some
areas will be etched sooner than others due to the uneven distribution of
chemicals in heterogeneous reactions, which happen between solid material
and liquid solution. As a result, chemical etching is only used in specific
cases such as removing top layers to expose transistors layer, removing bulk
silicon, selective etching of metal or doped regions.

Figure 12.16. 1 μm (a) and 0.5 μm (b) chip after its top layer was
chemically etched.
12.4.2. Mechanical deprocessing
Mechanical polishing or lapping is performed with the use of abrasive
materials. The process is time-consuming and requires special machines to
maintain the planarity of the surface. From the inspection perspective, the
advantages of using polishing over wet and dry etching techniques is the
ability to remove layer by layer and view features in the area of interest
within the same plane. It is especially useful on multi-layer interconnect
processes fabricated with advanced planarization techniques. Polishing
works well when it is necessary to remove a large amount of material. For
example, when part of the plastic or ceramic package is needed to be
removed, or for backside thinning. The major disadvantages of the lapping
process are difficulty in maintaining flatness of the surface and inevitable
scratches created by abrasive material embedded into polishing discs
(Figure 12.17).

Figure 12.17. Surface of the chip after lapping: (a) corner; (b) logic area.
12.4.3. Chemical–mechanical polishing (CMP)
deprocessing
CMP is the most widely used method. It combines fine mechanical removal
with some chemicals helping in selective removal of certain material.
However, it lacks the uniform removal of internal IC layers. Nevertheless, it
gives very smooth surfaces and maintains flatness throughout the entire
surface of the chip (Figure 12.18). The process requires special lapping
machines equipped with felt discs and precision positioning of the sample,
preferably with automatically controlled feeding of the slurry, which
contains very fine abrasive particles suspended in a liquid with added
chemicals.

Figure 12.18. Surface of the chip after CMP: (a) corner; (b) logic area.
12.4.4. Plasma, RIE and FIB deprocessing
Both plasma and reactive-ion etching use radicals created from a gas inside
a special chamber. However, in plasma etching, the gas molecules are
ionized before reaching the sample’s surface, while in RIE, the sample is
placed directly on the RF electrode. As the ions are accelerated in an
electric field, they usually hit the surface of the sample perpendicularly.
Only the surfaces hit by the ions are removed; sides perpendicular to their
paths are not touched. Radicals formed from the gas react with the material
on the sample surface to form volatile products, which are pumped out of
the chamber. This results in the layers uniformly removed across a large
surface (Figure 12.19). Unfortunately, these deprocessing methods are not
suitable for all types of material inside chips, especially heavy metals which
do not form volatile compounds.

Figure 12.19. Surface of the chip after RIE: (a) corner; (b) logic area.
Some FIB machines are equipped with special gas injectors that allow fast
and controlled etching of surface material. Although suitable for wide range
of materials, they have limited size of the etching area. Table 12.1 outlines
the discussed delayering methods with their pros and cons.
Table 12.1. Sample preparation methods
Method
Application
Advantages
Disadvantages
Grinding
Packaging and
films
Fast,
inexpensive
Rough surface, deep
scratches
Lapping
Bonding wires,
layers
Affordable
Uneven surface with
scratches
CMP
Layers
Acceptable
flatness
Uneven removal
Plasma and
RIE
Layers
Good flatness
Not suitable for all
materials
FIB etch
Layers
Uniform
removal
Limited area of
application
12.4.5. Staining techniques
Dash etching can help in distinguishing between p- and n-doped regions in
the transistor layer. This helps in identification of CMOS library elements
(Figure 12.20). That way, secure library elements can be spotted and Mask

ROM content from some secure ICs could be extracted. Recipes for
selective etching of different material are described in Beck (1998).
Figure 12.20. Optical and SEM images of the logic area after selective
dash etching
12.4.6. From images to netlist
Once the samples are prepared and delayered, the next step is imaging. For
structures down to 120 nm, optical microscopes can be used. For deep sub-
micron structures present in modern chips, electron microscopes must be
used. Modern microscopes are usually equipped with motorized stages and
their software is capable of acquiring images automatically and storing
them on a hard drive. Hence, imaging of a large area is only a question of
properly configuring the software and the time required to take thousands of
shots.
The next step is stitching the frames within the same layer. There are two
approaches to this process: the images can be merged into a very large
picture, or a database that holds coordinates of multiple tiles can be created.
Given the high resolution of the images, there could be some performance
issues when a large graphic file is processed. For example, a 1×1 mm2 area
imaged with 10 nm per pixel resolution will result in 100,000×100,000
pixels image. In the meantime, the database can be established by first
merging the neighboring frames together before splitting them into tiles of
fixed sizes. As a result, the alignment and processing of the layers could be
done much faster.
For further processing, the final pictures of each layer must be aligned such
that the same structural elements appear at the same coordinates. That way,

it would become easier to trace the wires which usually go multiple times
from one layer to another. Images can be merged, aligned and processed
using various image editor software tools. For example, open source
graphic editor GIMP allows various image manipulations, merging, and can
handle multiple layers. Figure 12.21 shows the images of the same area
after deprocessing and alignment: three metal layers, polysilicon layer and
diffusion layer.
If in old chips everything was built from discrete transistors, then in modern
devices, functionality is created by connecting standard logic cells with
wires. Hence, it is wise to identify those standard cells and find their
representations across the device. This is normally done in the image of the
transistor layer, which is the very bottom layer exposed after deprocessing.
This layer is also called diffusion layer or active layer. Each type of the
element or gate such as flip-flop, NAND, NOR and XOR must be identified
and named. The same applies to discrete components such as resistors,
capacitors, individual diodes and transistors.
Figure 12.21. Layers in 0.35 μm chip: (a) metal 3; (b) metal 2; (c) metal 1;
(d) polysilicon; (e) diffusion.
Finally, the connections between all the identified cells and components
must be traced, thus creating the large schematic of the chip. The tracing is
performed by following the wires from the input and output of the cells.
Those wires could go in multiple layers and wires in different layers are
connected together using vias – tiny metal links between metals, polysilicon
and diffusion layers. After that, the netlist can be created. This represents
description of all the elements and their interconnections. It can be viewed
as a schematic image which is similar to a circuit diagram in electronics.
Figure 12.22 shows different steps in the reverse engineering process from
obtaining the SEM images and overlaying them to digitizing, selecting

certain layers, extracting schematics for part of the circuit and Verilog
simulation.
Figure 12.22. Reverse engineering phases: (a) SEM overlay image; (b)
digitized area overlay; (c) tracing specific layers; (d) schematic image; (e)
Verilog description.
The overall process and the outcome is very similar to that for PCB reverse
engineering. The differences are in types of components, materials and
dimensions. There are specialized software tools which could make the
reverse engineering process less tedious. Among them, the most known
ones are several commercial software tools: Pix2Net from MicroNet
Solutions, Hierux from Cellixsoft and ChipJuice from Texplained, as well
as an open source tool called Degate. Those tools assist in IC reverse
engineering process offering automation and assistance for some steps such
as stitching, cells identification, wire tracing and netlist extraction. Some of
those tools can also help in the analysis of the netlist in order to identify
hardware blocks, modules and functions. However, many standard chip
designing tools such as Cadence from Cadence Design Systems can accept
netlist and use it for simulation and design observation.
Reverse engineering helps in understanding the hardware and spotting
weaknesses otherwise not visible during the normal design process. This
way, a developer could look at the device as a black box and independently
evaluate its security protection.
12.5. Memory dump and hardware cloning
Hardware cloning is the process of creating a component without
investment into its design. Functional cloning could be done by observing
the behavior of a device. This is only suitable for relatively simple devices

where enough information could be collected with eavesdropping on its
communication. Brute-forcing can be used to clone PLD and CPLD
devices, which have a limited number of internal states. Modern systems
are usually based on CPUs, microcontrollers, FPGAs and SoCs. Therefore,
their cloning could be accomplished by copying their embedded memory,
either the user data or bitstream. For security sensitive applications,
developers tend to use devices with embedded memory, thus making any
access to the code and data more problematic. In addition, some devices
offer hardware encryption of the on-chip memory to make such access even
more challenging, but not impossible.
For most custom-designed devices, the only practical way to understand
their functionality is via reverse engineering of their silicon. However, the
majority of systems around us are based on standard devices programmed
with user code and data. Their analysis could be performed through
disassembling and decompilation of the code stored in their embedded
memory. In that respect, the attempt to extract and analyze the code
becomes the first step in the hardware security evaluation of many devices.
If a device has a well documented debugging interface (JTAG or similar)
that had been disabled by the developer, then most attacks will be aimed at
bypassing this protection. However, for many devices there will be the lack
of detailed documentation on their debugging interface or other means of
access to the embedded memory. In this case there could be several options
to obtain such knowledge. If the device has on-chip Mask ROM then most
likely it would contain a factory test code or bootloader for uploading
programmable memory such as EEPROM, Flash or SRAM. Information
inside a Mask ROM array is usually stored in the form of present and
absent transistors which is then turned into 0s and 1s by the memory control
logic. The actual encoding could therefore be present inside a metal layer, a
polysilicon layer, a diffusion layer or in a via layer. As a result, different
deprocessing techniques must be used to make these encodings visible
(Figure 12.23). When the encoding is done via different levels of doping
concentration inside memory cell transistors, special staining techniques
must be used after all top layers are stripped off the chip surface (Figure
12.24).

Figure 12.23. Examples of deprocessed mask ROMs: (a) wet etching to
metal 1; (b) wet etching to diffusion; (c) plasma etching to diffusion.
Figure 12.24. Examples of stained mask ROMs: (a) deprocessed NOR
ROM; (b) stained NOR ROM; (c) deprocessed NAND ROM; (d) stained
NAND ROM.
For data extraction from EEPROM and Flash, more sophisticated methods
must be used. Some chips might have hidden backdoors that allow such
access; however, finding those interfaces and exploiting them could be an
extremely challenging task that often requires some level of reverse
engineering to learn more about the device features. Microprobing could
also help with data extraction when other methods fail; however, it is a
more expensive approach. Ultimately, special tools such as atomic force
microscopes and SEMs could directly image the state of memory cell
transistors. However, this kind of approach requires sophisticated sample
preparation methods and much slower than through electrical interfaces.
Figure 12.25 shows conventional and advanced images of the Flash array in
a modern chip using SEM. For some custom silicon devices, direct
extraction using SEM imaging could be the most practical way of data
extraction and analysis.

Figure 12.25. Flash area SEM imaging in 90-nm chip: (a) conventional
image; (b) advanced contrast image
12.6. Conclusion
The methods discussed in this chapter can be used for attacking the devices.
However, they can also be used for analyzing the existing security
protection features and improving them. By finding weak spots in the
hardware security and improving them, both the cost and time of possible
attacks could be increased.
12.7. Notes and further references
Section 12.2.1. The physical protection at PCB level is discussed.
National Institute of Standards and Technology published FIPS 140-2
standard in Lee et al. (2001), which outlines requirements for physical
protection of devices. Kingston Technology Company, Inc. (2018) is
an example of a FIPS 140-2 Level 3 certified device. Microwave-
induced plasma (Tang et al. 2017) could be used as an alternative to
chemical decapsulation of various devices and careful removal of
epoxy. Identification of SMD components present on PCBs could
become easier with the use of SMD books (Turuta 2019).
Section 12.2.2. Some examples of the initial preparation at the
components level are given. Power and clock glitching was discussed

in Anderson and Kuhn (1996). Power analysis attacks were introduced
in Kocher et al. (1999). Various kinds of semi-invasive and invasive
attacks are described in Skorobogatov (2005).
Section 12.3. Introduces probing attacks. Active probes could be made
from relatively inexpensive components as described in Skorobogatov
(2005). By placing a probing needle on the CPU bus, it is possible to
inject an arbitrary code even into encrypted data bus (Skorobogatov
2017b). Chip modification could be used to bypass sophisticated
security protections as described in Kömmerling and Kuhn (1999).
Section 12.4.5. Staining techniques to expose doped regions on the
silicon substrate are introduced. The recipes can be found in Beck
(1998). Section 12.4.6 discusses netlist creation methods. More
information about the reverse engineering process can be found in
Torrance and James (2009).
Section 12.5. This outlines memory extraction methods. Some could
rely on undocumented features and backdoors (Skorobogatov and
Woods 2012), while other methods require direct access to embedded
memory. For that, special microscopy tools such as AFM (Nardi et al.
2006) and SEM (Skorobogatov 2017a) could be used.
12.8. References
Anderson, R.J. and Kuhn, M. (1996). Tamper resistance: A cautionary note.
In WOEC’96: Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Proceedings of the
Second USENIX Workshop on Electronic Commerce – Volume 2. ACM,
New York.
Beck, F. (1998). Integrated Circuit Failure Analysis: A Guide to
Preparation Techniques. Wiley, Hoboken.
Kingston Technology Company, Inc. (2018). FIPS 140-2 non-proprietary
security policy: Ironkey d300 series usb flash drive. Kingston
Technology Company, Inc.
Kocher, P.C., Jaffe, J., Jun, B. (1999). Differential power analysis. In
Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO’ 99. Springer, Heidelberg.

Kömmerling, O. and Kuhn, M.G. (1999). Design principles for tamper-
resistant smartcard processors. In USENIX Workshop on Smartcard
Technology (Smartcard 99). Chicago.
Lee, A., Smid, M.E., Snouffer, S.R. (2001). Security requirements for
cryptographic modules. NIST, FIPS PUB 140-2.
Nardi, C.D., Desplats, R., Perdu, P., Guérin, C., Gauffier, J.L., Amundsen,
T.B. (2006). Direct measurements of charge in floating gate transistor
channels of flash memories using scanning capacitance microscopy. In
ISTFA 2006: Conference Proceedings from the 32nd International
Symposium for Testing and Failure Analysis. Electronic Device Failure
Analysis Society and ASM International, Austin.
Skorobogatov, S. (2005). Semi-invasive attacks – A new approach to
hardware security analysis. Technical Report, University of Cambridge,
UCAM-CL-TR-630.
Skorobogatov, S. (2017a). Deep dip teardown of tubeless insulin pump.
arXiv:1709.06026.
Skorobogatov, S. (2017b). How microprobing can attack encrypted
memory. In 2017 Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design
(DSD). IEEE, Vienna.
Skorobogatov, S. and Woods, C. (2012). Breakthrough silicon scanning
discovers backdoor in military chip. In Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems – CHES 2012, Prouff, E. and Schaumont, P. (eds).
Springer, Heidelberg.
Tang, J., Wang, B., Liu, C., Wang, J., Beenakker, C.I.M. (2017). Unique
failure analysis capabilities enabled by the mip decapsulation technique.
In 2017 IEEE 24th International Symposium on the Physical and Failure
Analysis of Integrated Circuits (IPFA). Chengdu.
Torrance, R. and James, D. (2009). The state-of-the-art in IC reverse
engineering. In Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems –
CHES 2009, Clavier, C. and Gaj, K. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.

Turuta (2019). Active SMD semiconductor components marking codes.
SMD-Codes Databook [Online]. Available at: http://www.turuta.md.
OceanofPDF.com

13
Gate-Level Protection
Sylvain GUILLEY1 and Jean-Luc DANGER2
1Secure-IC S.A.S., Cesson-Sévigné, France
2Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
13.1. Introduction
Many modern cryptographic algorithms are theoretically robust and
immune from practical cryptanalysis in the “black box” model. However,
some methods can be deployed to break the security by attacking the
physical implementation of virtually any algorithm. These attacks can be
mounted by merely observing or perturbing the targeted system. Observing
the activity of the system and its correlation with potential guesses can yield
sensitive information. Such attacks are better known as side-channel attacks
(SCAs). When a device is perturbed such that it yields a non-nominal
output, this together with expected output can lead to the secret key. Such
attacks are called differential fault analyses (DFAs).
From the attacker point of view, the advantage of SCAs is that they can be
perpetrated while the target system operates in its comfort zone. In such
conditions, from the defense perspective, it is difficult to detect that the
activity of the target is being observed. To defeat SCA efficiently, the
countermeasures have to at least be submitted at the logic level.
Dual-rail with precharge logic (DPL) is a class of countermeasures which
aims to make the device activity constant and independent of the data
processed. DPL operates at the gate level: therefore, any single Boolean
operation is protected against information leakage. It consists of balancing
the side-channel leakage by activating either one part of the gate, or its
complement, depending on the value to be generated. Owing to this
redundant representation, such gates can also be used to detect errors, and
hence offer DFA resistance as a by-product.
The gates obeying DPL are fairly large in terms of silicon area: overheads
of factors 3–5 are to be expected, depending on the security level. Security

indeed comes at a cost. However, it is interesting to note that the societal
and technological trends indeed make this apparent drawback acceptable.
Embedded devices are becoming widespread and manipulate data that are
more and more precious. Thus, the asset of an integrated circuit (IC) is
expected to protect sensitive information which increases every day in
quantity and in value. In the meantime, the fabrication of ICs is becoming
more and more efficient, allowing for an exponential increase in integration
capacity (tendency known as Moore’s law). Thus, for those two reasons, it
is interesting to trade silicon area for an increased security level conveyed
by DPL: achieving the greatest security is more and more economically
relevant as security needs are increasing and the silicon area is getting
cheaper.
In this chapter, we propose an overview of the main gate-level styles, with a
focus on their vulnerabilities against both side-channel and fault attacks.
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows. Section 13.2 presents the
DPL countermeasure at the logical level and the major vulnerabilities
incurred by the backend. Then, section 13.3 describes how the
vulnerabilities are addressed by the already evaluated logic styles in either
FPGA or ASIC. Section 13.4 explains how some optimizations and original
solutions can be found using specific technologies. A synoptic comparison
between the known logic styles is drawn in section 13.5. Finally,
conclusions and perspectives are discussed in section 13.6.
13.2. DPL principle, built-in DFA resistance,
and latent side-channel vulnerabilities
13.2.1. Information hiding rationale
The aim of DPL is to hide the internal circuit’s activity from a prospective
attacker. If any sensitive variable update occurs with a constant activity, it is
likely that all side-channels are also updated. Therefore, the measurable
quantity from an attacker’s point of view is independent from any secret
value. The protocol of the DPL consists of two phases: precharge and
evaluation. The precharge phase allows new computations from a known
electrical state to start. It thus prevents unexpected transitions between two
computation steps. The dual-rail signalization of the data is conveyed by

two wires for each Boolean variable: NULL = (0, 0) or (1, 1) while in
precharge and VALID ∈ {(0, 1), (1, 0)} while in evaluation. Therefore,
every evaluation consists of the transition of exactly one wire:
If the design is adequately balanced, an attacker will be unable to discern
which transition actually occurred.
13.2.2. DPL built-in DFA resistance
Single bit faults are inefficient against DPL because they turn a VALID data
into a NULL token that propagates and leads to a non-exploitable error
since it hides the faulted value. This is the typical scenario described in the
seminal paper by Selmane et al. (2009), introducing the intrinsic immunity
of DPL against some classes of DFA.
Highly multiple faults ((1, 0) ↔ (0, 1)) randomly generate a large quantity
of NULL values along with some more unlikely but devastating bit-flips.
However, as NULL values are systematically propagated, they proliferate
very quickly after some combinatorial logic layers traversal. And as they
have the nice property to contaminate VALID values, the risky coherent bit-
flips (simultaneous 
 and 
 in one dual-rail couple) have a
great chance of being jammed through the propagation toward the
algorithm output. This absorption property is all the more efficient as the
number of NULL generated by the multiple faults is high. Therefore, the
only way to inject a poisonous fault is to stress the circuit sufficiently
enough to have multiple faults, without nonetheless creating too many
faults so as to leave a chance for them not to be absorbed during their
percolation towards the outputs.
13.2.3. Vulnerabilities with respect to side-channel
attacks
Although perfectly sound at the logical level, DPL ends up being concretely
implemented in physical devices. Now, the logical description of DPL
ignores any timing and capacitance’s notions.

Regarding the timing, three unbalanced behaviors can occur. On the way
from the precharge to the evaluation, and vice-versa, the following can
exist:
1. spurious transitions, referred to as glitches, that negate the hypothesis
of activity invariability;
2. early evaluation (EE) effects: take place if the gate switching depends
on the difference between the arrival time of the inputs;
3. technological bias: this flaw comes from the imbalance between the
dual signals. It can be caused by the manufacturing dispersion, the
place-and-route stage or merely the types of gate driving the true and
false networks. This could be exploited by an attacker who measures
the signal emanating from one wire of a pair.
The cross-coupling is another issue endangering the security of DPL
designs.
Section 13.3 explains how these latent flaws have been addressed by some
existing DPL logics, whereas section 13.4 illustrates technology-dependent
optimizations and innovative solutions.
13.3. DPL families based on standard cells
13.3.1. WDDL
Wave dynamic differential logic (WDDL) meets all of the logical
constraints of a DPL. The initial state is propagated by a wave of (0, 0)
couples through the netlist thanks to the use solely of positive gates. The
fact that exactly one half of the gates evaluate results from the duality
between the true and false networks. In addition, the positivity of WDDL
ensures the absence of glitches in the complete netlist. Note that WDDL
with gates propagating the NULL spacer, but without being positive, is
easily broken in practice. However,WDDL is prone to EE and early
precharge. The early evaluation (EE) effect comes from the difference of
delay between two variables of a same gate. Figure 13.1 illustrates the EE
flaw when variable a is in advance to variable b. In this case, the output
does not switch at the same time.

Figure 13.1. WDDL AND gate with the early evaluation flaw
Moreover, the dual networks are not necessarily balanced, since the
transistor structures of x ↦ f(x) and 
 differ. Therefore, either
incremental improvements or radically novel strategies have shown up.
13.3.2. MDPL
Masked dual-rail with precharge logic (MDPL) is an attempt to fix the
otherwise imbalance of WDDL. The assumption is that, in some conditions,
it can be difficult to constrain a router to balance the differential
interconnect. The fat wire and duplication methods allow the ASIC designer
to balance the dual routing in ASIC. The transposition to FPGA is possible,
albeit with less fine-grain control over the result. For this reason, MDPL
proposes to swap the true and false routes randomly, so as to emancipate
from the fatal routing unbalance. By the same token, it makes up for the
structural unbalance of the dual pair of gates. The only gates involved in the
logic are majority functions, both for the true and the false networks.
Nonetheless, MDPL fails to provide a solution to the EE and precharge of
WDDL. A fix is proposed under the name iMDPL.
13.3.3. DRSL
The primary focus of dual-rail random switching logic (DRSL) is to make
the evaluation and the precharge gates data independent. For this reason,
one pairwise unanimity gate1 computes the validity of all inputs prior to
allowing the gate to deliver any result, thus avoiding the EE flaw. On the

contrary, the unanimity makes it possible for the overall DRSL logic to
always anticipate the precharge. However, in the original design of DRSL,
the functions are not required to be positive. The example of the AND
function is sketched in Figure 13.2(a). Hence, the presence of data-
dependent glitches in the return to precharge phase.
An extensive simulation of the DRSL AND gate has been carried out when
it returns to precharge. Table 13.1 shows the situation where the mask is the
fastest to return to NULL. More precisely, we assume that m returns to
precharge first, followed by a and b in this order, which we abbreviate as
tm→NULL < ta→NULL < tb→NULL. It happens that the DRSL AND gate
glitches iff a ⊕ b = 1, irrespective of the mask value.
Notice that it could have been anticipated that the glitching property does
not depend on m if the mask is particular (e.g. the fastest signal) and a and b
are equivalent. Indeed, when m = 0, there will be a glitching pattern for the
DRSL AND gate computing in the direct convention, whereas when m = 1,
the glitching pattern will correspond to a complemented interpretation for
the functional signals a and b. As, by design of DRSL, the attacker cannot
make the difference between a transition occurring on a true or a false wire,
and the glitches will be observed without any distinction for each value of
m. As a return to NULL with a glitch consists of three transitions (one
functional plus two non-functional), whereas a return to NULL without a
glitch consists of a single transition, a correlation of the traces with the
value a ⊕ b will yield a peak. Assuming that a ⊕ b is sensitive and
predictable, this correlation is a means to test hypotheses.

Figure 13.2. (a) Genuine DRSL AND gate and (b) a glitch-free variant
Other types of transitions ordering have been studied. In the cases where
ta→NULL < tm→NULL < tb→NULL or ta→NULL < tb→NULL < tm→NULL, the
DRSL gate also features glitches, when b ⊕ m = 1, irrespective of the value
of variable a. But given that m is an unknown quantity, these glitches do not
convey any information about the value of b. The glitches are thus
innocuous in these cases. There is, however, a possible flaw if b is known
(e.g. it is a primary input, such as one bit of the plaintext). In this case, the
value of the cryptoprocessor-wide mask bit (i.e. only one bit of entropy is
used for the routing randomness) can be estimated by classifying the traces
according to their intensity.
However, the situation where the mask is the fastest to return to zero is the
most likely, for at least two compelling reasons:
1. As the mask is global (shared by all the protected gates), it is amplified
and therefore propagates very fast, in a similar way as a clock signal.
2. Also, the mask is directly available at one register’s output, whereas
the data signals can traverse many other DRSL instances prior to
arriving at the gate’s inputs.

Table 13.1. Exhaustive simulation of all the return to NULL cases in the
DRSL NAND gate when the mask signal m is faster than the functional
inputs a and b. The events unfold from top to bottom for the eight
configurations of the triple (m, a, b). Dual-rail signals X are ordered as XT
XF. Glitches are indicated in red boldface font.
Mask = 0: Direct function Mask = 1: Dual function
a = 0 b = 0 m = 0 pre q
a = 0 b = 0 m = 1 pre q
0 1 0 1 0
1
0
0 1 0 1 0 1 1
0
0
0 1
0 1 0 1 0
0
0
0 1 0 1 0 1 0
0
0
0 1
0 1 0 1 0
0
1
0 1 0 1 0 1 0
0
1
0 1
0 0 0 1 0
0
1
0 0 0 0 0 1 0
0
1
0 0
0 0 0 0 0
0
1
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0
1
0 0
a = 0 b = 1 m = 0 pre q
a = 0 b = 1 m = 1 pre q
0 1 1 0 0
1
0
0 1 0 1 1 0 1
0
0
1 0
0 1 1 0 0
0
0
1 1 0 1 1 0 0
0
0
1 1
0 1 1 0 0
0
1
1 1 0 1 1 0 0
0
1
1 1
0 0 1 0 0
0
1
0 0 0 0 1 0 0
0
1
0 0
0 0 0 0 0
0
1
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0
1
0 0
a = 1 b = 0 m = 0 pre q
a = 1 b = 0 m = 1 pre q
1 0 0 1 0
1
0
0 1 1 0 0 1 1
0
0
1 0
1 0 0 1 0
0
0
1 1 1 0 0 1 0
0
0
1 1
1 0 0 1 0
0
1
1 1 1 0 0 1 0
0
1
1 1
0 0 0 1 0
0
1
0 0 0 0 0 1 0
0
1
0 0
0 0 0 0 0
0
1
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0
1
0 0
a = 1 b = 1 m = 0 pre q
a = 1 b = 1 m = 1 pre q
1 0 1 0 0
1
0
1 0 1 0 1 0 1
0
0
1 0
1 0 1 0 0
0
0
1 0 1 0 1 0 0
0
0
1 0
1 0 1 0 0
0
1
1 0 1 0 1 0 0
0
1
1 0
0 0 1 0 0
0
1
0 0 0 0 1 0 0
0
1
0 0

Mask = 0: Direct function Mask = 1: Dual function
0 0 0 0 0
0
1
0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0
1
0 0
The DRSL AND gate has been simulated in STMicroelectronics 130 nm
technology with the BSIM3V3 MOS transistors model. The testbench
consisted of the case of the return to precharge from the evaluation of (a =
0, b = 0 or 1, m = 0), where the dual-rail signal return to NULL in this
order: first m, then a and finally b. We confirm that there is a glitch on the
output, due to the race between the two gates “OAI222” (driving pre) and
“AOI2221” (driving qT and qF), connected via the precharge signal pre.
However, as it can be seen in Figure 13.3, the glitch on the output (more
specifically on QT, the true wire of q) reaches only vdd/2 = 0.6 V, hence it is
not likely to propagate through the next gates. At least, this conclusion
holds in this simulation, but may differ in other technologies or setups (with
different signals shape, power voltage, etc.). Thus, from the experiment, the
leakage due to the glitch does not lead to 1 transition (on QF) versus 1 + 2
(on QT).


Figure 13.3. Signal levels in a DRSL AND gate while it returns to
precharge in a configuration that generates internal glitches.
Two solutions can be imagined to patch the glitching problem of DRSL.
The first one consists of adding buffers to delay the signals so as to balance
the paths within the DRSL gate. This solution is however technology
dependent. Another option consists of implementing DRSL in positive
logic, as shown in Figure 13.2(b). This solution has a cost in CMOS logic,
because inverting gates are smaller than non-inverting ones. However, this
is not constraining in FPGA. A loss in area is nonetheless expected, as the
functionality can only consist of positive gates, thereby limiting the degree
of freedom of the logic synthesizers. In this case, the new logic, that we
name DRSL+, consists of MDPL augmented with a synchronization by an
unanimity cell.
Another attack against DRSL puts forward a vulnerability that is common
to all masked DPL styles. The idea is that the masking of the gates allows
us to make up for the routing unbalance. However, the mask signal is itself
differential and therefore unbalanced. As it is not balanced (since this is the
hypothesis when resorting to masked DPL), it paradoxically opens the door
to an attack on itself.
13.3.4. STTL
Secure triple track logic (STTL) eludes any glitching risk by waiting to
evaluate and precharge until all the inputs are either valid or NULL. This
incurs useless delays in the return to precharge phase, which is however
only detrimental to performance, not to security. The main drawback of
STTL is the requirement to route one synchronization signal slower than the
dual-rail, while granting a balanced routing within the dual-rail pair.
However, the known methods to balance signals (fat wire and backend
duplication) operate on a full netlist, and are therefore difficult to adapt on
heterogeneous netlists, in which single-ended and dual-rail signals are
mixed up.
13.3.5. BCDL
Balanced cell-based differential logic (BCDL) improves on STTL by
accelerating the precharge phase due to a global signal. As BCDL design

allows us to squeeze the precharge step, BCDL can compute about 80%
faster than DRSL because the precharge is global. This possibility is
depicted in Figure 13.4.
Furthermore, as the global signal is, by design, faster than data signals,
BCDL is free from the flaw identified in DRSL. Additionally, BDCL is a
truly differential logic. BCDL and STTL can be seen as equivalent at the
netlist level: input synchronization logic (either C-elements or unanimity
gates) can be factored in STTL to the detriment of the systematic addition
of a third routing resource.
13.3.6. WDDL variants
Some variants of WDDL have also been devised to ease the balance of the
WDDL networks. However, as already explained in the section devoted to
MDPL, it is known that balancing the WDDL interconnect does not solve
the EE inherent to this logic. Nevertheless, we introduce them here because
some of these logics have unexpected positive side-effects on their security
with respect to the EE.
13.3.6.1. DWDDL
Double WDDL (DWDDL) is a WDDL variant introduced to counterbalance
one unbalanced network with a dummy dual one. Although this solution is
sound in theory, other efforts have been deployed to reduce the overhead
associated with the further duplication of hardware in DWDDL. For
instance, the design of a WDDL substitution box (S-box) in BDD-style
allows for a separation between the true and false halves by a copy-and-
paste of the two halves, and guarantees the same backend.

Figure 13.4. Timing optimization in DPL protocol when the precharge is
anticipated, illustrated on one half of a DPL circuit consisting of one two-
stage register followed by one combinatorial function f
13.3.6.2. WDDL with divided backend duplication
The “divided backend duplication” technique (Baddam and Zwolinski
2008) is an attempt to separate WDDL into two halves that do not
communicate with each other. This way, the design can be placed-and-route
for one half, and then copied and pasted for the second half, where gates are

replaced by their dual function. For this purpose, the inverters are not
replaced by wire-crossings, but by controlled inverters; such gates are:
inverters in the evaluation phase;
buffers in the pre-charge phase.
On the one hand, the functionality is preserved during the evaluation, and
the two halves of the circuits remain dual. On the other hand, the
functionality is changed during the precharge; however, the modified
functionality is such that:
the complete function is positive, thus propagating the null token;
all of the nets are reached by the null token.
Thus, the netlist is properly precharged. For this behavior to be
implementable, a global phase signal is required. It is called EVAL and
must be faster than all the data changes. Indeed, its role is to cadence the
DPL protocol. It is equal to 1 in the evaluation phase and to 0 in the
precharge phase. The inverter 
 is thus replaced by a gate that
computes at when EVAL = 0 and 
 when EVAL = 1. This gate is thus an
exclusive or gate: 
.
The transformation of an unprotected function into a WDDL and a divided
backend duplication function is illustrated in Figure 13.5, for the example
of the mapping 
.

Figure 13.5. Combinatorial function 
 in (a) unprotected
standard cell synthesis, (b) WDDL and (c) divided backend duplication. The
inverters are highlighted in a gray box
Nonetheless, this strategy is not secure, since the fundamental hypothesis of

constant activity logics is violated. We illustrate this on the previous
example, where (a, b, c) evaluates to either (0, 1, 1) or (1, 1, 1). In other
words, the toggling count of this small netlist depends on the sensitive
variable a, which permits, in principle, a side-channel attack.
As shown in the simulation depicted in Figure 13.6 on the left side:
the net yt has a non-functional 0 → 1 → 0 transition (i.e. glitch) if and
only if a =1 in precharge (event noted (a));
it has the same bias in precharge (event noted (b)), with, in addition, an
early (respectively, late) transition if and only if a = 1 (respectively a =
0) (event noted (c)).
Figure 13.6. Chronogram of execution of the netlist depicted in Figure
13.5(c) for (a, b, c) = (0/1, 1, 1) (left) and for (a, b, c) = (0/1, 0, 0) (right)
Thus, this example shows that some configurations of some netlists leak
more than an unprotected implementation. Indeed, the difference in the
toggling count is |1 − 0| = 1 when the netlist is unprotected, whereas it is |(1
+ 2) − (1 + 0)| = 2 otherwise. Furthermore, the early propagation effect is
still present in this netlist. All in one, the security of the netlist is degraded,
since it has conditional glitches. Regarding the data-dependent delays, the
divided backend duplication method has helped fix the second-order issue
of true/false pairs routing balancing, while nonetheless keeping the first-
order flaw related to the early propagation effect.
Similar flaws can be observed when the netlist evaluates to (0, 0, 0) or (1, 0,
0). As shown in the chronogram on the right side of Figure 13.6:

when a = 1, there is a glitch on yf during evaluation (event denoted as
(a’)) and an EE of yt (event denoted as (b’));
the same happens in return to precharge: when a = 1, there is a glitch
on yf (event denoted as (c’)) and an EE of yt (event denoted as (b’)).
In order to properly balance the delays, two conditions should be fulfilled:
1. Along the interconnection network, when the true and false signals are
synchronized at the beginning, they should remain synchronized at the
end of the path. This condition is made explicit in Figure 13.7.
2. The true and false values should be outputted at the same date for
different input data, which is all the more important as the dual-rail
inputs do not arrive simultaneously at the gate entrance. This
requirement is illustrated in Figure 13.8.
The first condition is definitely enhanced by the divided backend balancing
logic. However, the second condition is definitely not respected, as it
inherits from the EPE issue of WDDL. The non-respect of this condition is
more dramatic than the non-respect of the first condition, because it induces
a bias that gets worse and worse as the gate is deep in the datapath.

Figure 13.7. Pairwise balance of dual-rail pairs in a DPL netlist
Figure 13.8. Example of netlist (e.g. one half of a WDDL netlist) prone to
the early evaluation effect. A netlist free from the early evaluation effect
would have a constant evaluation time for all the intermediate nodes
13.3.6.3. IWDDL
Isolated WDDL (IWDDL) is a different strategy to separate a WDDL netlist
into two unconnected halves. Here, inverters are kept, but potential glitches
are stopped by systematically inserting one register after it. This strategy is
expensive in terms of area and requires a redesign of the controller.
Additionally, the design becomes much more pipelined, which requires
much higher clock frequencies to maintain an acceptable throughput.

However, the benefit of this approach is to stop the propagation of the EE
wave. Apart from the very poor performance of IWDDL, this method is
however very strong from a pure security standpoint. Only one point is
questionable: the complete separation of the netlist opening the door to
well-located EMA attacks that can selectively record the activity from only
one half of the netlist, thus defeating the activity invariability property. This
issue is all the more stringent as the netlist is much larger in IWDDL than in
WDDL, because of the large quantity of registers added for the pipeline.
13.3.6.4. WDDL w/o EE
WDDL w/o EE is a logic style dedicated to FPGA that removes the EE
without computing a rendezvous. Instead, each functional half gate receives
the true and false inputs, and decides to output the VALID value only when
all the inputs are VALID. This behavior can be achieved by a purely
combinatorial gate. The detailed rationale behind the “WDDL w/o EE”
style is as follows:
The gate outputs NULL{0,1} when the inputs are NULL{0,1} or
transitional from this value.
The gate outputs VALID only when all the inputs are VALID.
In case of inconsistent values with respect to the DPL convention, the
gate outputs an arbitrary NULL value.
This logic does not evaluate early by design and propagates errors: if any
input is stuck to NULL or if the input is out of specifications, then the
output always remains NULL too. In addition, this logic does not generate
glitches even if the functionality is not positive, and can be inverting.
Therefore, the synthesis is more optimized than for plain WDDL.
13.4. Technological specific DPL styles
13.4.1. Full custom optimizations
The “sense amplifier-based logic” (SABL) style is one of the first full
custom DPLs, which aims to make power consumption independent of both
the logic values and the sequence of the data. Its principle consists of

combining differential and dynamic logic (DDL), like in the “dynamic
cascode voltage switch logic” (DCVSL) style, while fixing second-order
asymmetry in the gate (especially for complex logic functions), due to
parasitic capacitance. This allows us to decorrelate the power consumption
from the inputs. Dynamic current mode logic (DyCML) is an improvement
of SABL, as only one of the output nodes is discharged during the
precharge phase. This leads to better performances, such as a reduction by
80% of the power delay product and by 50% of the power consumption. In
addition, DyCML is assessed to be more resistant to DPA than SABL.
The ternary DPL (TDPL) tries to balance the DPL gates by adding a
systematic discharge after the evaluation. The resulting computations are
thus based on a ternary pace: (1) pre-charge, (2) evaluation and (3) post-
discharge. When compared to SABL, TDPL simulations reveal that a gain
of two-orders of magnitude is obtained in terms of balance.
SecLib is a full-custom logic style depicted in Figure 13.9. This logic is
based on quasi-delay insensitive asynchronous primitives that are balanced
to provide constant evaluation, precharge time and dissipation. Specially
crafted transistor-level symmetry grants SecLib a higher resistance level to
attacks than WDDL, albeit at a high cost in terms of silicon area.

Figure 13.9. Schematic of the QDI secured (aka SecLib) AND gate (left)
and its internal 3OR architecture (right)
“MOS current mode logic” (MCML) is a differential gate that offers
reduced voltage swing thanks to differential operation. In addition, power
consumption is independent of the operating frequency. It has been shown
that it is also efficient to reduce the leakage.
The LUT-based dual-rail logic (LBDL) is a full-custom version of FPGA
LUT relying on a tree of multiplexers. It uses an N-MOS look-up table
(LUT) architecture for the computation, and P-MOS pull-ups at every
internal node for the precharge. The LUT is implemented as a binary tree,
where each node is controlled by one input (af, at). The net computes:
The example of the true half of an AND gate in given in Figure 13.10.
In this figure, the binary nets are highlighted in grey boxes. The use of pass-
transistors instead of transmission gates for the look-up makes the
propagation time dependant on the result. Indeed, N-MOS transistors

propagate the zeroes more quickly than the ones; therefore, LBDL exhibits
an asymmetric when it evaluates and when it precharges.
Figure 13.10. True half of the AND gate in LBDL
13.4.2. Asynchronous logic
Some asynchronous logic styles operate in a DPL mode. Their dual rail
encoding and synchronization stage makes it intrinsically robust against
side-channel attacks. If the netlist and their layout is additionally balanced,
asynchronous styles can be a candidate for secure computing. In addition,
asynchronous logics are also more tolerant to the environmental variations,
which makes them inherently more difficult to attack with faults injections.

13.4.3. Reversible differential logic
Reversible logic is a means to compute without loosing energy at any step.
This implies that at any moment of the computation, the operations may be
reversed. Two precursors in this field of research were Tommaso Toffoli
and Edward Fredkin, who proved that the concept of reversible computing
was indeed realizable physically, provided that the function to implement is
logically reversible. Basically, they demonstrated that any bijection can be
mapped onto a reversible physical system. However, two difficult issues
were left uncovered by their work:
1. A generic synthesis method for arbitrary bijections, and also an
algorithm to provide the most compact netlist, is still be found.
2. An integrable electronic system suitable for the implementation of
reversible logic is lacking. Indeed, the only concrete example
illustrating Toffoli and Fredkin’s work was the famous albeit
unpractical “Billiard Ball” model, which cannot extend to thousands of
interactions, as required by our modern computational needs.
13.5. DPL styles comparison
Table 13.2 draws up a comparison of the main DPL styles, in terms of
principles, design constraints and performance, highlighting most of the
known advantages (masking, synchronization) and drawbacks (primitives
and back-end constraints, and technological bias) of such countermeasures.
Masking allows us to greatly reduce the technological bias, but also results
in a significant increase in area. As a matter of fact, it requires at least a
transformation of two-input operations into three-input majority functions
(MDPL), or into a four-input RSL gates (DRSL).
Synchronization on both precharge and evaluation is mandatory to avoid
glitches and early propagation effects.
Primitive constraints induce a higher complexity by reducing the panel of
usable functions (like in WDDL, where only positive functions are
allowed), or by binding the designer to use specific functions that can be
more area-consuming or slower than basic ones (SecLib, MDPL and
DRSL).

Back-end constraints generate extra design work, as the P/R stage has to
meet specific requirements to achieve a good balance between the T and F
networks. It can also cause a loss of performance, like in STTL where the
synchronization signal must be manually made slower than the others, by
adding delay elements between each of the gates in order to ensure that it
always switches last.
Technological bias corresponds to the imbalance between the true and false
networks. It encompasses the load, interconnect and CMOS structure
differences. This is a significant source of information leakage, and must
therefore be as low as possible to ensure a perfectly secure countermeasure.
13.6. Conclusion
In this chapter, we presented the different DPL logic styles that aim to hide
the cryptoprocessors activity to thwart side-channel attacks. Although the
DPL logic is based on an elegant manner to obtain secure implementations,
flaws exist at the logical and physical levels. The different logic styles are
more or less able to counteract these negative effects, but often with an
higher complexity or back-end design. This chapter permits the
understanding of the main DPL style and draws a comparison between them
in order to help the pros and the cons analysis. Research on new DPL styles
is still active to improve the robustness and keep a good compromise with
complexity and performance requirements.

Table 13.2. DPL performance and security features overview
Logic
Mask Synchro Constraints
Tech
Bias
Speed
Pre Eval Primitives
Back-end
WDDL no
✗
✗
positive funct
only
balanced
place&route
high
MDPL
yes
✗
✗
MAJ†
no
no
STTL
no
✓
✓
no
delay on sync
signal
very
low
DRSL
yes
✓
✗
no
no
no
LBDL
no
✓
✓
specific lib
back-end
duplication
high
SecLib
no
✓
✓
specific lib
back-end
duplication
very
low
IWDDL no
✓
✓
no
netlist post-
processing
low
‡
BCDL
no
✓
✓
no
balanced
place&route
low
† MAJ stands for the majority gate: MAJ(a, b, c) ≐ a · b + b · c + c · a.
‡ ni is the maximum number of inverters amongst all combinatorial paths.
13.7. Notes and further references
The seminal paper by Selmane et al. (2009) introduces the intrinsic
immunity of DPL against some classes of DFA.
DPL families based on standard cells
DPL to thwart DFA:
WDDL has been presented in Tiri and Verbauwhede (2004a). The
flaws of WDDL, like the non-positiveness and the early evaluation, are
discussed in Guilley et al. (2008d) and Suzuki and Saeki (2006, 2008),
respectively. Some attacks exploiting the imbalance between the two

WDDL networks are described in ASIC by Tiri et al. (2005) or in an
FPGA by Sauvage et al. (2009).
MDPL is a logic style that has been introduced in Popp and Mangard
(2005). Balancing in ASIC can be done either by the fat wire (Tiri and
Verbauwhede 2004b) or backend duplication (Guilley et al. 2005)
methods. This can be transposed in FPGA with less accuracy (Guilley
et al. 2008a).
iMDPL is an improvement of MDPL in terms of elimination of the
early precharge and evaluation issue (Popp et al. 2007, p. 90).
DRSL has been presented in Chen and Zhou (2006). An attack on the
mask is described in Tiri and Schaumont (2006). A more generic attack
exploiting the imbalance of the dual nets of the mask is presented in
Saeki and Suzuki (2008).
STTL is introduced in Soares et al. (2008) and BCDL in Nassar et al.
(2010).
WDDL variant double WDDL (DWDDL) is introduced in Yu and
Schaumont (2007). S-box implemented in BDD style is presented in
Guilley et al. (2008a) and Akishita et al. (2008). The “divided backend
duplication” technique to balance WDDL is introduced in Baddam and
Zwolinski (2008). The IWDDL style is presented in McEvoy et al.
(2009), and slight unbalances that are exploitable are shown in Moradi
et al. (2012). WDDL w/o early evaluation is studied in Bhasin et al.
(2009).
Technological specific DPL styles
Full custom implementations have been proposed in Tiri et al. (2002) and
Verbauwhede and Tiri (2008). An improvement of SABL, the “Dynamic
Current Mode Logic” DyCML is presented in Allam and Elmasry (2000)
and Macé et al. (2004). The ternary DPL TDPL is described in Bucci et al.
(2006).
SecLib is a delay-independent logic style introduced in Guilley et al.
(2004, 2007, 2008c) and Guilley et al. (2008b).
MCML has been assessed in Regazzoni et al. (2007, 2009a, 2009b).

LBDL, the LUT-Based Dual-rail Logic, has been presented in Yue et al.
(2009).
Asynchronous logic used for side-channel resistance is studied in
Bouesse et al. (2004, 2005) and Hassoune et al. (2007). It is
reminiscent of SecLib.
Reversible Differential Logic arises originally as a solution for low-
power constraints. Two precursors in this field of research were
Tommaso Toffoli and Edward Fredkin (Toffoli 1980; Fredkin and
Toffoli 1982). The question of the synthesis of the reversible logic has
received some answers in Kerntopf (2004) and Wille and Große
(2007). Regarding the implementation feasibility, it has been covered
in Vos and Rentergem (2005), where the authors describe some
implementations in CMOS.
13.8. References
Akishita, T., Katagi, M., Miyato, Y., Mizuno, A., Shibutani, K. (2008). A
practical DPA countermeasure with BDD architecture. In CARDIS.
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Allam, M. and Elmasry, M. (2000). Dynamic current mode logic (DyCML),
a new low-power high-performance logic family. In Proceedings of the
IEEE 2000 Custom Integrated Circuits Conference (Cat. No.
00CH37044), Orlando.
Baddam, K. and Zwolinski, M. (2008). Divided backend duplication
methodology for balanced dual rail routing. In CHES. Springer,
Washington, DC. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-85053-3_25.
Bhasin, S., Danger, J.-L., Flament, F., Graba, T., Guilley, S., Mathieu, Y.,
Nassar, M., Sauvage, L., Selmane, N. (2009). Combined SCA and DFA
countermeasures integrable in a FPGA design flow. In ReConFig. IEEE,
Cancun. doi: 10.1109/ReConFig.2009.50.
Bouesse, G.F., Renaudin, M., Robisson, B., Beigné, E., Liardet, P.-Y.,
Prevosto, S., Sonzogni, J. (2004). DPA on quasi delay insensitive
asynchronous circuits: Concrete results. In XIX Conference on Design of

Circuits and Integrated Systems, Proceedings of DCIS’04), November,
Bordeaux [Online]. Available at:
http://tima.imag.fr/cis/publi/2004/DCIS04DPA.pdfPDF.
Bouesse, G.F., Renaudin, M., Dumont, S., Germain, F. (2005). DPA on
quasi delay insensitive asynchronous circuits: Formalization and
improvement. In Proceedings of DATE’05. IEEE Computer Society.
Bucci, M., Giancane, L., Luzzi, R., Trifiletti, A. (2006). Three-phase dual-
rail pre-charge logic. In CHES 2006. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. doi:
10.1007/11894063.
Chen, Z. and Zhou, Y. (2006). Dual-rail random switching logic: A
countermeasure to reduce side channel leakage. In CHES 2006. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
Fredkin, E. and Toffoli, T. (1982). Conservative logic. International Journal
of Theoretical Physics, 21(3/4), 219–253. doi: 10.1007/BF01857727.
Guilley, S., Hoogvorst, P., Mathieu, Y., Pacalet, R., Provost, J. (2004).
CMOS structures suitable for secured hardware. In DATE’04. IEEE
Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/DATE.2004.1269113
Guilley, S., Hoogvorst, P., Mathieu, Y., Pacalet, R. (2005). The “backend
duplication” method. In CHES 2005. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Guilley, S., Flament, F., Hoogvorst, P., Pacalet, R., Mathieu, Y. (2007).
Secured CAD back-end flow for power-analysis-resistant
cryptoprocessors. IEEE Des. Test Comput., 24(6), 546–555. doi:
10.1109/MDT.2007.202.
Guilley, S., Chaudhuri, S., Sauvage, L., Graba, T., Danger, J.-L., Hoogvorst,
P., Vong, V.-N., Nassar, M. (2008a). Place-and-route impact on the
security of DPL designs in FPGAs. In HOST (Hardware Oriented
Security and Trust). IEEE.
Guilley, S., Chaudhuri, S., Sauvage, L., Hoogvorst, P., Pacalet, R., Bertoni,
G.M. (2008b). Security evaluation of WDDL and SecLib
countermeasures against power attacks. IEEE Transactions on
Computers, 57(11), 1482–1497.

Guilley, S., Flament, F., Pacalet, R., Hoogvorst, P., Mathieu, Y. (2008c).
Security evaluation of a balanced quasi-delay insensitive library. In
DCIS. IEEE [Online]. Available at: http://www.dcis.org/.
Guilley, S., Sauvage, L., Danger, J.-L., Graba, T., Mathieu, Y. (2008d).
Evaluation of power-constant dual-rail logic as a protection of
cryptographic applications in FPGAs. In SSIRI. IEEE Computer Society.
doi: 10.1109/SSIRI.2008.31.
Hassoune, I., Macé, F., Flandre, D., Legat, J.-D. (2007). Dynamic
differential self-timed logic families for robust and low-power security
ICs. Integration, the VLSI Journal, 40(3), 355–364. doi:
10.1016/j.vlsi.2006.04.001.
Kerntopf, P. (2004). A new heuristic algorithm for reversible logic
synthesis. In DAC’04: Proceedings of the 41st Annual Design
Automation Conference. ACM, New York.
Macé, F., Standaert, F.-X., Hassoune, I., Quisquater, J.-J., Legat, J.-D.
(2004). A dynamic current mode logic to counteract power analysis
attacks. In DCIS 2004 – 19th Conference on Design of Circuits and
Integrated Systems. DIAL, Bordeaux.
McEvoy, R.P., Murphy, C.C., Marnane, W.P., Tunstall, M. (2009). Isolated
WDDL: A hiding countermeasure for differential power analysis on
FPGAs. ACM Trans. Reconfigurable Technol. Syst., 2(1), 1–23.
Moradi, A., Kirschbaum, M., Eisenbarth, T., Paar, C. (2012). Masked dual-
rail precharge logic encounters state-of-the-art power analysis methods.
IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., 20(9), 1578–1589. doi:
10.1109/TVLSI.2011.2160375.
Nassar, M., Bhasin, S., Danger, J.-L., Duc, G., Guilley, S. (2010). BCDL: A
high performance balanced DPL with global precharge and without
early-evaluation. In DATE’10. IEEE Computer Society.
Popp, T. and Mangard, S. (2005). Masked dual-rail pre-charge logic: DPA-
resistance without routing constraints. In Proceedings of CHES’05.
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

Popp, T., Kirschbaum, M., Zefferer, T., Mangard, S. (2007). Evaluation of
the masked logic style MDPL on a prototype chip. In Cryptographic
Hardware and Embedded Systems – CHES 2007. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-74735-2_6.
Regazzoni, F., Badel, S., Eisenbarth, T., Großschädl, J., Poschmann, A.,
Toprak, Z., Macchetti, M., Pozzi, L., Paar, C., Leblebici, Y., Ienne, P.
(2007). A simulation-based methodology for evaluating DPA-resistance
of cryptographic functional units with application to CMOS and MCML
technologies. In International Conference on Embedded Computer
Systems: Architectures, Modeling, and Simulation (SAMOS IC 07).
IEEE, Samos.
Regazzoni, F., Cevrero, A., Standaert, F.-X., Badel, S., Kluter, T., Brisk, P.,
Leblebici, Y., Ienne, P. (2009a). A design flow and evaluation framework
for DPA-resistant instruction set extensions. In CHES 2009. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
Regazzoni, F., Eisenbarth, T., Poschmann, A., Großschädl, J., Gürkaynak,
F.K., Macchetti, M., Deniz, Z.T., Pozzi, L., Paar, C., Leblebici, Y. et al.
(2009b). Evaluating resistance of MCML technology to power analysis
attacks using a simulation-based methodology. Transactions on
Computational Science, 4, 230–243.
Saeki, M. and Suzuki, D. (2008). Security evaluations of MRSL and DRSL
considering signal delays. IEICE Transactions on Fundamentals of
Electronics, Communications and Computer Sciences, E91-A(1), 176–
183. doi: 10.1093/ietfec/e91-a.1.176.
Sauvage, L., Guilley, S., Danger, J.-L., Mathieu, Y., Nassar, M. (2009).
Successful attack on an FPGA-based WDDL DES cryptoprocessor
without place and route constraints. In DATE. IEEE Computer Society.
Selmane, N., Bhasin, S., Guilley, S., Graba, T., Danger, J.-L. (2009).
WDDL is protected against setup time violation attacks. In FDTC. IEEE
Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/FDTC.2009.40.
Soares, R., Calazans, N., Lomné, V., Maurine, P., Torres, L., Robert, M.
(2008). Evaluating the robustness of secure triple track logic through

prototyping. In SBCCI’08: Proceedings of the 21st Annual Symposium
on Integrated Circuits and System Design. ACM, New York.
Suzuki, D. and Saeki, M. (2006). Security evaluation of DPA
countermeasures using dual-rail pre-charge logic style. In CHES 2006.
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Suzuki, D. and Saeki, M. (2008). An analysis of leakage factors for dual-rail
pre-charge logic style. IEICE Transactions on Fundamentals of
Electronics, Communications and Computer Sciences, E91-A(1), 184–
192. doi: 10.1093/ietfec/e91-a.1.184.
Tiri, K. and Schaumont, P. (2006). Changing the odds against masked logic.
In 13th Annual Workshop on Selected Areas in Cryptography. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg.
Tiri, K. and Verbauwhede, I. (2004a). A logic level design methodology for
a secure DPA resistant ASIC or FPGA implementation. In DATE’04.
IEEE Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/DATE.2004.1268856.
Tiri, K. and Verbauwhede, I. (2004b). Place and route for secure standard
cell design. In Proceedings of WCC/CARDIS. Kluwer.
Tiri, K., Akmal, M., Verbauwhede, I. (2002). A dynamic and differential
CMOS logic with signal independent power consumption to withstand
differential power analysis on smart cards. In European Solid-State
Circuits Conference (ESSCIRC). IEEE, Florence [Online]. Available at:
http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/tiri02dynamic.html.
Tiri, K., Hwang, D., Hodjat, A., Lai, B.-C., Yang, S., Schaumont, P.,
Verbauwhede, I. (2005). Prototype IC with WDDL and differential
routing – DPA resistance assessment. In Proceedings of CHES’05.
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Toffoli, T. (1980). Reversible computing. In Proceedings of the 7th
Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming. Springer-
Verlag, London.
Verbauwhede, I. and Tiri, K. (2008). A dynamic and differential CMOS
logic with signal-independent power consumption to withstand

differential power analysis. US Patent 7,417,468 [Online]. Available at:
http://www.wipo.int/pctdb/en/wo.jsp?wo=2005029704.
Vos, A.D. and Rentergem, Y. (2005). Reversible computing: From
mathematical group theory to electronical circuit experiment. In CF
(Computing Frontiers). ACM, New York.
Wille, R. and Große, D. (2007). Fast exact Toffoli network synthesis of
reversible logic. In ICCAD’07: Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Computer-Aided Design. IEEE Press,
Piscataway. doi: 10.1109/ICCAD.2007.4397244.
Yu, P. and Schaumont, P. (2007). Secure FPGA circuits using controlled
placement and routing. In CODES+ISSS’07: Proceedings of the 5th
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Hardware/Software Codesign
and System Synthesis. ACM, New York.
Yue, D., Sun, Y., Zhang, M., Li, S., Dai, Y. (2009). A look-up-table based
differential logic to counteract DPA attacks. In ASICON. IEEE Computer
Society. doi: 10.1109/ASICON.2009.5351561.
Note
1 The pairwise unanimity Boolean gate performs the following
computation: (xT, xF, yT, yF, …, zT, zF) ↦ (xT + xF) · (yT + yF) · … · (zT +
zF).
OceanofPDF.com

14
Physically Unclonable Functions
Jean-Luc DANGER1, Sylvain GUILLEY2, Debdeep
MUKHOPADHYAY3 and Ulrich RUHRMAIR4
1Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
2Secure-IC S.A.S., Cesson-Sévigné, France
3Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India
4LMU Physics Department, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich,
Germany
14.1. Introduction
14.1.1. Principle
In the living world, we have organisms who share the same
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and yet are distinct via biometric traits, such
as fingerprints. A classic example in this context (which we can connect
easily) are twins. Although what distinguishes them and yet makes them so
similar can be attributed to the wonders of nature, it emphasizes the
importance of identity in a set of similar objects. Interestingly, in the
modern world of mass production, where products are designed once and
replicated from the initial template, it is also imperative to be capable of
differentiating among the entities pertaining to the same class. This
becomes all the more important in the world of cyber physical systems
(CPS) when we consider billions of devices, which are aimed to be
connected and communicating. In such situations, it is of absolute necessity
to be able to identify the devices to carefully allow or disallow the power of
control and command. The big question is, can the intrinsic device
properties be used to generate distinct fingerprints much akin to the world
of living creatures? Physically unclonable functions (abridged as PUFs) are
electronic structures innate to each chip instance, which generate unique per
chip bit sequences. As humans are unable to have complete control on the
chip design process, due to its inherent complexity and often approximated
device models, many slight uncertainties creep in the circuits. These

aberrations often arise due to process variations and are the center piece of
PUF designs. It offers a native tamper-resistance compared to conventional
cryptosystems, which need to store the secret keys in non-volatile
memories. PUFs are a unique and promising hardware security primitive
owing to the fact that the device’s intrinsic nature generates a secret keying
information, which is not explicitly stored in a memory or register. Instead,
the key is rebuilt (alike) upon each power-up.
The fabrication concept is illustrated in Figure 14.1. The PUF blueprint is
provided to the semiconductor foundry in a GDSII format, and the slight
differences between the produced devices are expressed by their PUF
instance.
Figure 14.1. PUF concept, from design to fabrication.
For digital silicon PUF, the process variation that impacts the fabrication of
every MOSFET transistor allows us to build a unique PUF for each device.
The threshold voltage Vth of the transistor is particularly impacted by the
process variation. As it expresses the gate-source voltage that allows the
drain-source channel to conduct, it can be used to differentiate two
transistors. The reasons that underlie the variability in MOSFET transistors
are threefold:
1. the density of dopants in the depletion area;
2. the thickness of the insulator below the gate;
3. the line edge roughness.

For specific fabrication processes, some additional factors can exist, such as
the body thickness in the case of Fully Depleted Silicon On Insulator (FD-
SOI). Figure 14.2 illustrates the variance of density of dopants and the
silicon oxide thickness on a MOSFET transistor. These variations are
increasing with recent thinner technologies.
Figure 14.2. Process variation in MOSFET transistor.
14.1.2. The twin nature of PUFs
PUFs have a twin nature. On the one hand, the primitive can be abstracted
as a Boolean function, mapping its inputs called challenges, to outputs that
are referred to as responses. On the other hand, this challenge–response
mapping should not be expressible as a closed form mathematical functions,
or should not be amenable to be modeled by a computer program. This twin
nature, is the most fascinating idea of a PUF, which potentially allows an
easy way of obtaining challenge–response pairs (CRPs), which can be used
to define a given hardware device, while the CRPs do not reveal any
mathematical function which can be used to compute the unknown
responses. In other words, the only way to obtain the responses is to have
physical possession of the device and apply the input challenge. It is
expected that because of the intrinsic properties of the device, the CRP
mapping is unique for every device. The relationship between the challenge

[14.1]
and the responses is thus dependent on complex properties of the
underlying platform and is a manifestation of the physics of the
phenomenon, which generates the output. It is believed that this physical
function (as opposed to mathematical function) cannot be imitated and is
unclonable. Informally, this implies that if we take two devices hosting a
given PUF in it and apply the same challenge to both, their responses
should be statistically independent. This means the knowledge of the
response from one device should not reveal information of the response
from another device. Subsequently, we discuss two broad classifications of
PUFs that define two diverse design families of PUFs owing to their
different applications and design principles. More formally, a PUF maps a
set of digital input vectors, known as challenges 
, to a corresponding set
of outputs, known as responses 
 for use as a unique fingerprint after the
required amount of post processing. The mapping can be represented as:
Figure 14.3 illustrates the basic PUF block.
Figure 14.3. Block diagram of a PUF circuit
As the base of the PUF is physical, the architecture requires a quantization
step to provide a digital response. This physical behavior is associated with
addition of noise before digitization. This could create faults at the
quantization step and a post-processing block should be added for
correction. Figure 14.4 illustrates the generic PUF architecture.
Figure 14.4. Generic architecture of PUF.

14.1.3. Properties
A PUF exhibits certain properties that are defined below using the above-
mentioned mapping:
1. Evaluable: given Γ and c, it is easy to evaluate r = Γ(c).
2. Unique: Γ(c) contains some information about the identity of the
physical entity embedding Γ(c).
3. Reproducible: y = Γ(c) is reproducible up to small (possibly
correctable) error.
4. Unclonable: given Γ(c), it is hard to construct a procedure Δ ≠ Γ such
that 
 up to a small error.
5. Unpredictable: given only a set 
, it is hard
to predict ru = Γ(cu) where 
.
6. One-way: given only r and Γ, it is hard to find c such that Γ(c) = r.
7. Tamper evident: altering the physical entity embedding r transforms to
Γ → Γ′ such that with high probability 
, not even up
to a small error.
Figure 14.5 illustrates the generic PUF architecture in its real environment,
which makes it difficult to meet all these properties. As the architecture of
PUF is natively physical, it is very sensitive to the bias introduced at the
design stage and by volatile environmental variables such as temperature,
voltage, aging and more importantly dynamic noise. It also offers many
vulnerabilities to both physical attacks and mathematical attacks, simply by
observing the CRPs.

Figure 14.5. Architecture of a PUF circuit in its real environment.
We can clearly deduce that the PUF may not be a panacea as security
primitive, as it can be impacted by the environment and attacks. This needs
much attention to respect these properties:
The unicity can be impacted by a bias in the PUF design. This can be
compared with the real entropy of the PUF and requires specific care
at design and inference stage.
The reproducibility is dependent on its reliability to face the
environmental noise. Indeed, the PUF relies on the extraction of
physical sources that are very sensitive to noise. Current PUF
technologies have a raw bit error rate (BER) between 2% and 15%.
Some reliability enhancement, like the error correction mechanisms,
have to be considered as post-processing blocks.
The unpredictability can be compromised by a design bias or by the
capability of modeling the PUF by an adversary. The PUF model
should be very complex to thwart such modeling attacks (MAs).
Tampering is a powerful threat by using physical means targeting the
PUF. These threats also consider passive attacks such as side-channel
analysis (SCA) able to read the PUF behavior and its response.
Efficient countermeasures have to be devised to meet this property.
An international standardization ISO/IEC 20897-1/-2 (see section 14.7.1)
addresses the properties and the requirements of PUFs, while being agnostic
to the PUF particular implementation.

14.1.4. Two broad classification of PUFs
PUFs can be broadly classified into two broad classes based on the nature
of security assurance they provide, catering to different type of applications:
1. Strong PUF:a strong PUF must have a large number of CRPs, often
exponential with respect to some design parameters, for example,
number of primitive constituents used in the design.
2. Weak PUF: on the other hand, weak PUFs offer a small challenge
space and sometimes can also be fixed and not accessible to the user.
There is another key distinction between the two types of PUFs: in strong
PUFs, the adversary can apply multiple challenges and has access to the
responses, while in weak PUFs, the responses are secret and hidden from
the adversary. Figure 14.6 illustrates the differences between the two types
of PUF.
Figure 14.6. Strong versus weak PUF.
What makes design of strong PUFs trickier is the additional guarantee that
the adversary who does not have physical possession of the PUF should not
be able to predict the response for a challenge, which it has not applied
before and observed the response. It may be emphasized that in literature
there is a debate on the usage of the adjectives, strong and weak, in the

sense they do not really compare security of the two categories of PUFs. It
is indeed true that in cryptography, the usage of the words strong and weak
is quite distinct, where it qualifies the ability of the primitive to satisfy
certain security definitions in the face of adaptive adversaries in the former
case, which is relaxed in the case of the weaker versions. In the literature of
PUFs, strong and weak largely defines two widely different class of PUFs,
which are also used in different applications. Strong PUFs are largely used
for building lightweight authentication systems by using CRPs, while weak
PUFs are used as key-derivation hardware security modules to take
advantage of cryptographic functions. Strong PUF can also be used as weak
PUFs to derivate a key. In this case, only a subset of challenges is used and
remain private as shown in Figure 14.6.
14.1.5. Necessity of enrollment
14.1.5.1. Purpose
A PUF has two main types of output or “identifier”: a list of CRPs, for a
strong PUF, or a constant word for a weak PUF, which can be used as a
cryptographic key. The enrollment phase is done just after fabrication, and
it is mandatory to store the identifier in a trusted server and to help
recovering it in a safe and secure way when the PUF is used (or
reconstructed). The enrollment is executed only once. A very important
stage at the end of enrollment is the locking of the PUF access in order to
avoid an attacker performing the enrollment themselves to retrieve the
secret identifier. It is more tricky for the strong PUF as the challenges and
responses are public. The locking operation can be done by the use of a
specific technology like anti-fuse, or by using a specific protocol to access
the PUF. For a strong PUF, the list of CRPs is so large that a huge memory
is necessary. It is preferable to model the PUF function as expressed in
equation [14.1] and store it.
Ideally, the mathematical function of the PUF may be very complicated,
thus not easy to model. Hence, some machine learning (ML) algorithms can
be used. This modeling capability is contrary to the security requirement, as
the modeling can be executed by an attacker as the challenges and
responses are public words. Consequently, the complexity of the model has
to be such that an ML attack (MA) is not possible in reasonable time. Even

if the model is complex, modeling at the enrollment stage can be made
possible by accessing some sub-parts of the PUF separately. This makes
sense when the PUF is a composition of functions. These accesses have to
be locked at the end of the enrollment phase.
14.1.5.2. Enrollment of helper data
The PUF is very sensitive to noise and has natively a high BER. This is
particularly annoying for weak PUFs, which generate a cryptographic key
and thus require a very steady response. To help correcting the errors, the
enrollment phase registers a specific word to help the reconstruction: the
helper data (HD). The use of helper data is explained in Chapter 3 of
Volume 1 dedicated to the enhancement of the reliability property.
14.1.5.3. Inference or reconstruction
The inference of the PUF corresponds to the PUF usage. The identifier is
extracted by running the PUF function without the necessity of a storage,
thus providing a high level of security compared to secret stored in
memories. During the reconstruction potential errors can be corrected by
taking advantage of the HD to build a steady PUF. Figure 14.7 illustrates
the two phases of enrollment and inference for a weak PUF, which
generates a device identifier.
Figure 14.7. The two phases of the weak PUF lifecycle.
14.1.6. Use-cases
PUFs can be used to fulfill different needs where non-tamperability is a

strong requirement. They are used to generate non-stored security
parameters. The use-cases can be classified in three main categories:
confidentiality, identification and authentication.
Confidentiality: the PUF identifier is used as a cryptographic key for
ciphering/deciphering. As the key is known neither by the designer nor
by the firmware developer, such a solution solves the problem of key
management, as each device handles its own key. There are many
related use-cases. One specific to digital circuits is the protection of
hardware intellectual properties by using logic locking.
Identification: the PUF identifier is read to know the identity of the
device. One typical use-case is the protection against counterfeiting
using illegal overproduced devices. Only the recognized identifiers are
considered genuine.
Authentication: the PUF identification is made robust against man-in-
the-middle attacks. Pure cryptographic protocols can be used with the
key spawn from a PUF. The strong PUFs offers the possibility to use
CRP protocols which are non-cryptographic, thus, they are well suited
for low-cost solutions. However, this protocol can be the target of
powerful attacks like replay attacks and MAs (refer to section 14.5),
and should be protected.
14.2. PUF architectures
There are numerous architectures of PUF in digital electronics in CMOS
and/or emerging technologies. They can easily be integrated in high-end or
embedded systems like Internet of Things (IoT) or low-cost products. The
sources from which the mismatch is extracted are electrical variables,
depending on a small physical quantity, which has to be leveraged. As these
sources are physical, it is necessary to convert them into the digital world.
This generally requires a simple 1-bit quantizer. For instance, the
digitization can be the comparison between two voltages, or the binary state
of a cell, or a wire which is open or closed.
The architectures of PUFs closely depends on their category: either weak
PUFs that are characterized by their small number of challenges or strong
PUFs that have a multiplicity of CRPs.

14.2.1. Weak PUFs
Weak PUFs are structured with a set of elementary cells independent of
each other. The memory PUF is a popular type of weak PUF as it does not
require a specific design and the memory exists in all digital systems. It is
more precisely described below. Another type of weak PUF is the contact
PUF, as represented in Figure 14.8. It relies on vias between two metal
layers. As the via is at the limit of connection, the noise during the
fabrication process either creates a junction or leaves the via open.
Emerging Non Volatile memory, as resistive RAM, are good candidates to
provide robust weak PUFs. Some other methods rely on the stress of the
silicon oxide below the transistor gate. All these emerging PUFs require a
specific process.
This chapter mainly focuses on the memory PUF that is the most used weak
PUF. Its main drawback its native lack of reliability. Hence, there is a need
to add processing to reduce the bit errors. This block is particularly
important when the response is used for cryptographic use. A classical
example of memory PUFs are the SRAM PUFs, one of the prominent PUFs
that are commercially deployed. The startup values an SRAM cell that is
otherwise used for storing data serves as a PUF response. As shown in
Figure 14.9, the relative strength of the two inverters determine the power-
up state of the SRAM cell. The address of the SRAM cell serves as the
challenge for the PUF, which indicates the location of the SRAM cell
activated to retrieve the response.

Figure 14.8. Contact PUF.
Figure 14.9. SRAM cell with cross-coupled inverters and device
fingerprinting using SRAM PUFs.
SRAM PUFs are typically used for device intrinsic key generation as it can
ideally generate unique response per device. It is to be noted that the
response of an SRAM PUF is 0-skewed or 1-skewed or neutral, that is, it
can either be 0 or 1. An error correcting code (ECC) is required to get a
reliable response from SRAM PUFs. An ECC-enabled SRAM PUF can be
used for reliable key generation for cryptographic applications.
However, all devices like FPGAs may not have such SRAM structures. In
these situations, butterfly PUFs were proposed as candidate weak PUFs
exploiting the basic underlying principles of SRAM PUFs. The basic
building blocks for SRAM based PUFs are cross-couple circuits, which
store a specific bit in the loop, owing to its positive feedback (Figure
14.10).

The latch has two stable operating points and one unstable operating point.
The circuits are designed as symmetrically as possible, ensuring that the
small differences are due to the slight wiring delay differences in the
feedback paths and the voltage-transfer characteristics of the feedback
elements. Thus, while the circuit is usually in the unstable operating region,
it moves to one of the stable regions. However, the final stable operating
point, which corresponds to a response of 0 or 1 is hard for an external
person to predict due to the uncertainty of the disorder, which causes the
circuit to stabilize. Hence, while for the same device the circuit produces a
repeatable response, the response from one device does not provide any
information of the response expected from another device, thus providing
the much needed uniqueness property of PUFs. The concept of a butterfly
PUF is based on using FPGA structures to realize the basic idea of cross-
coupling as in an SRAM PUF. In this case (Figure 14.11), as combinatorial
feedbacks are hard to design in an FPGA, there are two latches in a cross-
coupled loop.

Figure 14.10. Cross-couple latch: A basic building block for memory-based
PUFs
Figure 14.11. Butterfly PUF

The latch elements have a PRE signal, which when set high, drives the state
Q of the corresponding latch to logic 1, while there is a CLR signal which
when set high, drives Q to logic 0. The PRE signal and the CLR signal of
the latches are set to logic 0, and the latch propagates the input D to Q when
the clock signal (CLK) goes high. When we want the device to operate as a
PUF, the input signal TIG is used to excite the circuit by assigning TIG to
logic 1. This sets the two latches in conflicting modes, latch1 trying to go to
logic 0, while latch2 tending to go logic 1. After few clock cycles, the TIG
is brought low, thus allowing the circuit to settle down to either logic 0 or 1,
depending on the wire delays. The wire delays are ensured almost equal
lengths by careful manual placement or by suitably guiding the FPGA
design processes through constraints, thus making the tendency toward 0 or
1 a function of the intrinsic properties of the device. This provides the
circuit PUF like properties, where for the same device the response would
be repeatable and reliable, even when the temperature or other operating
conditions are varied, but for a new device, an external agent’s guess on the
stable state of the design would be as good as a random guess.
14.2.2. Strong PUFs
The strong PUF requires an architecture which accepts many CRPs and has
a high complexity to make it difficult to model by an attacker. The delay-
PUF is the most popular class of strong PUFs. It relies on the propagation
time of logic gates along a delay chain.
The archetype of delay PUF in electronics is the arbiter PUF as illustrated
in Figure 14.12.

[14.2]
Figure 14.12. Arbiter PUF
The N-bit challenge C drives two delay paths feeding by the same signal.
An edge of the input signal triggers a race between the top and the bottom
path. The two paths are determined by N delay elements, which can swap
the paths according to the challenge bit. The winner of the race is given by
the arbiter (as an SR-latch) at the end of the chain. The decision is the 1-bit
response R, who can be modeled as in equation [14.2].
With Ci being the challenge bit of delay element i, 
 being the delay
difference between the top path and the bottom path when Ci is at ‘1’, and
 is when Ci is at “0”.
The design of the delay element is not obvious as the two lines must cross
each other, which makes the element difficult to balance. As seen in the
chapter related to entropy, the imbalance creates a bias that decreases the
randomness of the response. It is preferable to design by using two identical
delay chains as shown in Figure 14.13. The only design constraint is to
duplicate the placement and routing of the two delay chains.

Figure 14.13. Arbiter PUF with identical delay chain
Rather than comparing two identical delay chains in one shot, the delay
chain can be compared if they are looped by an inverter, thus forming a ring
oscillator (RO). One interest of this approach providing ring-based PUFs is
that the response can be quantified on more than one bit. However, the
response latency is increased. The RO-PUF is the most popular ring-based
PUF, as illustrated in Figure 14.14.

Figure 14.14. RO- PUF
The RO-PUF architecture relies on a set of identical ROs, where two of
them are considered for a comparison of oscillation frequencies. The
challenge bit is to select the pair of the two ROs to compare and the
response is extracted from the frequency difference.
The loop-PUF is a ring-based structure that requires only one RO with
controllable delay elements, as shown in Figure 14.15.

Figure 14.15. Loop-PUF
This PUF requires a specific protocol: the measurement of frequency with
the challenge C must be followed by the measurement with the
complementary challenge 
. The response is extracted from the frequency
difference.
Concerning the ring-based PUF, like the RO-PUF and loop-PUF, it is
interesting to note that the quantization of the response that may be not only
the sign (or MSB). It can be on more MSB bits, giving rise to multi-bin
response, whereas the arbiter-PUF has only a dual-bit response. This
specificity can be helpful to optimize the reliability and entropy properties
at the expense of a greater latency.

Table 14.1. List of the main PUF types in digital circuits
PUF
W/S Physical source
Design type Members
Delay-PUF
S
Difference of
delays in delay
chains
Standard
Arbiter-PUF, XOR-
arbiter PUF,
interpose-PUF, RO-
PUF, RO-sum PUF,
Loop-PUF
Memory-
PUF
W
Difference of
threshold voltage
of two looped
inverting gates
Standard or
no design
SRAM-PUF, DFF-
PUF, latch-PUF,
buskeeper-PUF,
MECCA-PUF,
TERO-PUF
Metal-PUF
W
Conductivity of
wires and vias
Custom
Contact-PUF,
Litho-PUF
Oxide-
breakdown-
PUF
W
Gate oxide rupture
when stressed
Custom
SOFT-BD-PUF
Emerging
NVM-PUF
W
Cell resistivity
after initialisation
Custom,
hybrid
technology
RRAM-PUF,
MRAM-PUF
14.2.3. Big picture of PUF architectures
Table 14.1 shows a classification of the main representative PUF families in
digital devices according to the physical sources. It indicates if they are
natively strong or weak (W/S) and the main physical principle.
This table also shows the design effort for a given family. The delay and
memory PUFs are easy to design in current CMOS technology like
standard-cell ASICs or FPGAs, without the use of full custom technologies.
As they are very sensitive to noise, other types of PUF families have been
proposed to reduce this weakness. This table is not exhaustive as the
literarure is rich of original and astute PUFs. It considers the most
representative PUFs, which give rise to many studies, and for some of them,
technological transfers to the industry.

14.3. Reliability enhancement
The steadiness, or reliability, is a key property as the generation of the PUF
response can be corrupted by environmental noise and aging. For delay and
memory PUFs, the experiments show that the BER is around 2–15%. It
turns out that reliability enhancement techniques are necessary, especially
when the PUF is used to generate a response which might be steady, as for a
key generation. The main techniques to enhance reliability are as follows:
correction with ECC, allowing us to build a “fuzzy extractor” of the
key;
proactive selection of challenges where unreliable CRPs or response
bits are discarded;
use of a technology that provides native stability. Some emerging
technologies are proposed to be natively very reliable, such as metal-
PUF, software-breakdown-PUFs and RRAM or MRAM PUFs. They
require a significant design effort or an hybridization with CMOS
technology.
The choice of ECC and the threshold to filter out unreliable challenges must
integrate the environmental noise, that is, the change in temperature and
power supply voltage in addition to local noise. The aging has also to be
taken into account. The most impactful aging phenomenon is the negative
bias temperature instability (NBTI), which is manifested by an increase of
the threshold voltage of transistors, and is particularly evident in switched-
on PMOS. This effect can be reduced by using burn-in stages to bypass the
first period of usage where the aging is predominant.
Other solutions are to build architectures or protocols to make sure the P-
MOS transistors are switch-off when the PUF is not used.
14.3.1. Use of error correcting codes
For ECC and challenge selection, HD is necessary to help reconstructing
the PUF. Figure 14.16 illustrates the way to construct and use the HD when
an ECC is used in a “code-offset” mode. The HD, called “secure sketch”, is
a linear addition of an ECC codeword and a set of response bits r. A key can

be derived by the fuzzy extraction method based on a hash function of the
set of corrected responses and a public word p.
Figure 14.16. PUF fuzzy extraction of a key by means of ECC and secure
sketch
With a high error rate of a few percentage, it is necessary to use
concateneted ECC codes, that is, two ECC in cascade, to go down to very
BEC-like 10−9.
Some of the popular ECC schemes used to get a reliable PUF response
include Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) codes, Reed–Muller (RM)
codes and repetition (CRep) codes. Hence, an ECC-enabled SRAM PUF can
be used for reliable key generation for cryptographic applications. The ECC
circuit is used to generate a helper information which is registered at the
time of enrollment. Subsequently, the noisy PUF responses are corrected
using the helper information. However, before discussing in detail the
techniques of generating and using helper information, we present a brief
background on the coding theory.
14.3.1.1. Coding theory
Coding theory explores the bijective mapping of a message space 
 into a
codeword space 
. A linear block code (C) is typically defined using the
parameters [n, k, d] with message length 
, n being the
length of each codeword (v) and d being the minimum number of bits in
which two unique codewords should differ. A code C is capable of decoding
up to t = ⌊(d − 1)/2⌋ errors. There exists 2k valid codewords 
 and
there are (2n − 2k) invalid words (v″) such that 
. Further, the
minimum weight among non-zero codewords in C is also d.

[14.3]
[14.4]
The translation 
 or the encoding process in C, utilizes generalized
vectors which can be mapped into a (k × n) generator matrix (G), such that
the following equation holds true:
Here, mi denotes individual message bits of a message 
, wherein mi ∈
{0,1}, ∀ 0 ≤ i ≤ k − 1. Also, we use gi, 0 ≤ i ≤ k − 1 to denote the k-rows of
the generator matrix, G. G = [P||Ik], where || is used to denote augmentation
of two matrices P and Ik, where P is the parity bit matrix and Ik is the (k ×
k) identity matrix. The parity check matrix (H) is a crucial matrix utilized in
the decoding process in C. H consists of an (n − k) × (n − k) identity matrix
followed by the transpose of the parity bits in G (= PT). Formally, H =
[In−kPT ]. During the decoding phase, v can potentially get corrupted and
transformed to v′ such that v′ = v ⊕ e, where v is the original codeword and
e is the error vector introduced through the channel. Now, ei = 1 for
, otherwise ei = 0 for 
, where 0 ≤ i ≤ n − 1. Let r be the
received word such that r ∈ {v, v′}. The decoder computes an (n − k)-tuple,
known as the Syndrome (S yn) of r. Mathematically, S yn can be defined as
follows:
For valid codewords, S yn = 0 implying r = v; otherwise, S yn = e · HT for r
= v′. A special array consisting of the 2n words (r) partitioned into 2k
disjoint subsets (Di), such that each subset Di has a one-to-one
correspondence with a unique codeword (v), is called the standard array.
Hence, the standard array highlights a decoding methodology for r. For
perfect codes, r always differs at t-bits from a codeword v, that is, the
Hamming distance between r and v denoted as HD(r, v) = t. Words with
HD(r, v) > t are not guaranteed to be decodable. For cyclic codes, any
number of circular shifts in its codeword (vx) configuration bits results in
another codeword (vy). The standard array has 2n/2k = 2n−k disjoint rows,

which are called the cosets of C. The first n-tuple error vector e0 in a coset
is called the coset leader or coset representative of each coset. However,
any member of a particular coset can be its coset leader. The coset in which
r belongs gives the introduced e in r, utilizing which the corresponding
codeword v can be decoded. There exists 2n−k coset leaders, including the
all zero vectors. They form the correctable error vectors.
14.3.1.2. Helper data algorithms
Next, we discuss the importance and working principles of HD generation
algorithms for PUF-based key generation. First, PUF responses are
typically noisy. Hence, it cannot be used directly as a key in a cryptographic
primitive. Secondly, even if the regenerated responses are not noisy, the
PUF responses cannot form a cryptographically secure key because they are
not uniformly distributed. This is where the secure sketch algorithm for HD
generation comes to aid.
The secure sketch consists of a couple of procedures, namely, the
generation procedure (GEN) that takes the input of the PUF response (x)
and publishes the HD (w1). Formally, w1 ← GEN(x). The second procedure
is the reconstruction procedure (REP) that utilizes the publicly known
information p and the noisy version of the PUF response 
 to recover 
.
If 
, the recovery is successful. Otherwise, there is no
guarantee of the same. Here, t is the error correcting capability of the
underlying block code in the secure sketch. Most secure sketches rely on
binary block codes for the recovery procedure. Formally,
.
A fuzzy extractor slightly modifies the concept of a secure sketch. The first
fuzzy extractor was initially aimed at biometric applications. It follows the
same procedures as that of the secure sketch, however, with a slight
modification. The GEN procedure now requires two inputs: the PUF
response x and a set 
 of the universal hash functions to publish the HD
set W, such that W = (w1, w2). Here, w1 is generated in the same way as that
of a secure sketch, hence it is synonymous to Y, but w2 stores the index of
the hash function chosen as randomness extractor to generate the secret key.
Henceforth, the REP procedure recovers the key using HD set W and the
noisy PUF response 
 to regenerate the secret key (K). Like a secure

sketch, the fuzzy extractor relies on binary block codes (C) for the GEN and
REP procedures. Exploring elaborately into the GEN procedure, the PUF
response (x) is XORed with a randomly chosen word Cs from C. The secret
key is generated from the response by utilizing a hash function. Figure
14.17 lists the fuzzy extractor’s GEN and REP procedures. The error
correcting capability of the fuzzy extractor depends on the efficacy of the
underlying block code utilized in its construction. One important aspect is
the fact that as the HD depends on the PUF response, it does leak some
information of the secret response. Entropy bounds have been developed to
measure this leakage.
Figure 14.17. The fuzzy extractor for key generation
14.3.2. Discarding unreliable bits
In case of challenge filtering, the unreliable response bits, sometimes called
dark bits, are marked and discarded. The HD can be used to point out these
bits. They will be discarded during the reconstruction phase. This filtering
operation requires a reliability threshold to adjust the BER. This directly
impacts the entropy as less responses are available.
14.3.3. Stochastic model of reliability
Stochastic models are build to express the PUF properties according to the
architecture, the technological dispersion and the environment including
dynamic noise, temperature and aging. Reliability and entropy are the main
properties, which can be formalized by stochastic models.
The stochastic model is expressed with the error probability, or BER, where
a bit of response is considered erroneous if it differs from the reference

enrollment value. The knowledge of the stochastic model greatly helps the
designer to add correction mechanisms. A parameter that directly impacts
the reliability is the ratio of the variance of the process mismatch to the
noise variance, often called signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). The process and
noise distributions are normally distributed which is verified by the
experiments on many PUFs. As the delay and memory PUFs in CMOS are
natively unreliable, with a BER of a few percentage, their stochastic model
allows the designer to dimension the effort to make the PUF steady.
14.3.3.1. Weak PUFs
The responses of weak PUFs have a two-bins distribution. Their stochastic
model is validated by multiple measurements and relies on the distribution
of the error probability. Weak PUFs are dependent to their spatial position
and layout, especially if they are organized in matricial architectures like
SRAM PUFs. It turns out that the error probability is specific to each
memory cell. An accurate stochastic model has to take into account the
position of each cell, along with the environmental noise and aging.
14.3.3.2. Strong PUFs
If we consider Delay-PUFs, their response is the result of a threshold
function which is generally the sign of the delay difference:
, where ci ∈ {±1} are the challenges bits (being equal to
either −1 or +1), and where Δi is the random process variation associated
with element 1 ≤ i ≤ n in an n-bit delay PUF. It has been shown that the
BER model is expressed by: 
. The correction
capacity of the ECC is then applied to refine the model. Multi-bin strong
PUFs facilitates the correction as the reliability is internally known in the
module of the response. For instance, the ECC correction can take
advantage of a soft-decision for decoding. Also, when filtering out
unreliable challenges with multi-bin delay-PUFs, a response is considered
unreliable if its reliability value is within W.σ with σ being the noise
standard deviation. The stochastic model in this case is closed to:

with T being the Owen’s T function. Figure 14.18 illustrates the BER curves
according to the SNR for different levels of filtering. Another method with
the multi-bin PUFs is to use two metrics rather than the sign (or 0
threshold), thus allowing us to choose the best metrics for a maximal
reliability, the HD indicating which is the best metrics.
Figure 14.18. BER with and without challenges filtering.
14.4. Entropy assessment
The PUF entropy is also of utmost importance as it expresses the
unpredictability and uniformity of the PUF responses in a same device
(intra-die) or between devices (inter-die). The entropy inter-die corresponds
to the “uniqueness” property. It is fundamental to get a trusted identification
and authentication of devices. The entropy intra-die is particularly
important to know when the PUF generates a cryptographic key, as it must
be exactly equal to the key length. The uniformity is one characteristic to
express the quality of randomnsess. It corresponds to the 1-bit intra-die
entropy and allows us to point out a bias in the PUF architecture.
The uniqueness and randomness properties can be assessed by statistical
tests such as the ones proposed in the ISO/IEC 20897-1/-2 international
standards (see section 14.7.1), or the true random number generator
(TRNG) tests. As the uniqueness requires many devices, the tests can be
leveraged by a stochastic model formalizing the entropy versus the

architecture, environment and noise. It can also formalize the n-bit entropy,
which is crucial for a key generation.
14.4.1. Stochastic model of the entropy
The entropy is greatly impacted by the reliability, the PUF architecture and
the PUF layout, which can generate bias. Unbiased weak PUFs have a very
simple expression of their entropy: it is equal to the number of elements
which are reliable. The estimation of the entropy for strong PUFs is more
complex: The number of challenges is exponential in the size of the PUF,
but the entropy is not scaling as fast. For instance, a one-bit difference in
challenges of a delay-PUF involves a very small increase in entropy. It has
been shown that an n-bit delay PUF, as the arbiter-PUF or Loop-PUF, has
an entropy which is equal to n for n-bit challenges if they are reliable and
belong to Hadamard codes, that is, having a minimum Hamming distance of
n/2. This property enables us to use strong PUFs as weak PUFs to generate
a key. Beyond the entropy of n, the Shannon entropy scales about quadratic
in the challenges space size as shown in Figure 14.19 with other types of
entropy.
Figure 14.19. Different entropy types for a delay PUF with n ≤ 10 bits.
14.4.2. Entropy loss due to helper data
Entropy is the measure of randomness. The min-entropy is a conservative
measure of the randomness of an outcome. The min-entropy of a random

[14.5]
[14.6]
variable X can be defined using equation [14.5].
The conditional min-entropy of a random variable X, given another random
variable Y, is determined using equation [14.6], where X and Y may or may
not be correlated.
Analyzing the entropy leakage of the PUF response, denoted using X, due
to the exposure of the helper information, denoted as Y, thus amounts to
bound the value of 
. Assume that the HD is generated by a linear
block code C with parameters [n, k, d]. The residual conditional min-
entropy of the PUF response (X), given the HD (Y), is always less than the
min-entropy of the original PUF response. According to the HD algorithms,
the simple reason is that whenever the HD is published, there is an
information leakage that might lead to the successful recovery of the secret
PUF response. Thus, it is easy to infer that the min-entropy loss should be
minimized to achieve desired security.
The min-entropy loss, or the information leakage, is bounded by the well-
established (n − k) bound. However, subsequently researchers have
proposed tighter bounds corresponding to the min-entropy loss utilizing a
coset-based graphical approach. They have used a subset-partitioning of the
PUF responses that consider realistic distributions in the PUF responses.
One such partitioning could be based on the Hamming weights of the PUF
responses; based on the intuition for a given Hamming class, the probability
of a response to occur is similar. Thus, the subset-partitioning partitions X
into a finite number of subsets φj, where j ∈ {1, (n + 1)} such that all the
elements belonging to a subset (φj) has the same probability (fj) of
occurrence. Here, fj would denote the probability that the Hamming weight
of a response x, is a chosen (j − 1).
The residual min-entropy, 
, can be estimated using equation
[14.6] and applying Bayes theorem. Thus, we have:

[14.7]
[14.8]
[14.9]
Here, 
 denotes the message space. To obtain 
, a coset-based
graphical approach, as illustrated in Figure 14.20, is utilized. The HD
elements are mapped to the coset elements (represented as black squares),
and the white squares are un-mapped coset elements. Figure 14.20
illustrates the case where 2n PUF responses are uniformly distributed across
all 2n−k cosets. This provides an upper bound of the estimate for 
.
On the other hand, a non-uniform and skewed distribution would provide
the lower bound estimate.
However, equation [14.7] can now be rewritten as equation [14.9] to
estimate 
 for any distribution of the PUF responses.
Here, 
 is the number of standard array elements assigned to the jth subset
(φj) of the PUF response. Equation [14.9] proposes to estimate the residual
min-entropy by iterating over all x. It assigns a HD y ∈ Y to it through x ⊕
v until the set Y, the entire HD set, which is the standard array of size 2n of
the underlying linear block code, is exhausted.

Figure 14.20. Distribution of 2n PUF responses into the set Y of size 2n.
Black squares denote the (decodable) terms in set Y that contribute to the
calculation of residual min-entropy. The white squares do not contribute to
14.5. Resistance to attacks
The resistance to attacks, whether mathematical or physical, is also
imperative to keep the high level of security provided by the PUF.
The attacker’s goal is to get the PUF response, and in case of strong PUFs
the model in order to derive the response from any challenge. Attacks can
be sorted according to their level of intrusion, or the type of channel used to
extract information:
1. non-invasive attacks, which use functional channels from which the
attacker manipulates inputs/outputs. One powerful non-invasive attack
is the MA, which aims at finding the PUF model. It is particularly
efficient when using ML algorithms;
2. semi-invasive attacks, using side-channels to observe or disturb the
PUF activity. It can be used to extract the PUF response when not

available on the functional channel; it can also be a support to MAs or
used as profiling attacks;
3. invasive attacks, where the PUF blueprint is copied and cloned by
physical means. This attack type tries to jeopardize the native
unclonability property of PUFs.
The attacks on PUF can be mathematical, physical or both. Mathematical
attacks are non-invasive and perpetrated by using functional channels.
Physical attacks can be either semi-invasive or fully invasive by using side-
channels or accessing the internal PUF structure.
14.5.1. Non-invasive attacks
The attack changes the inputs at will and accesses the outputs. The main
attack type is to get the PUF model, also called PUF MA, by collecting
many CRPs. As the weak PUF has no challenges, it is not concerned by this
type of attack. The exploitation of the public HD is another type of
powerful non-invasive attack.
14.5.1.1. Modeling attacks
The MA exploits the publicly available CRPs to find the model of a strong
PUF. The resistance of a PUF to MA can be quantified with its
representation as a Boolean function. The more this Boolean function is
diffusive and non-linear, the more difficult it is to fit a model on the PUF.
This property of strict avalanche criterion (SAC) is not met by strong PUFs,
which have linear additive delay models, thus are easy to model. The ML
algorithms are particularly efficient to build the model, which can be
learned in a few thousand pairs of challenge-responses in an arbiter-PUF.
Moreover, an ML attack can be greatly helped by side-channel
observations. In order to be resistant against MA, the addition of
nonlinearity is to combine PUFs, or to cipher the challenge and/or the
response, or to use a specific protocol between the trusted server and the
PUF.
PUF combination: the combination relies on using different PUFs either in
parallel, or by composing them sequentially, or both. A popular combination
of PUFs relies on XORing different strong PUF outputs. XORing many
arbiter PUFs, seriously increases the robustness against MA, but at the

expense of a loss of reliability. However, this type of combination remains
vulnerable asymptotically. For instance, one of the most robust PUF is the
interpose PUF, which turns out to be more robust than the XOR-PUF with
the same complexity. However, it has been attacked by powerful ML using
a divide-and-conquer approach and millions of CRPs in the training dataset.
Ciphering the challenge-response: the PUF is “controlled” or surrounded
by cryptographic blocks like a hash function to thwart the ML attacks. The
response requires necessarily an error correction block as a single bit error
generates an avalanche of errors at the cryptographic block output. This
solution is efficient against ML attacks but involves the use of a
cryptographic functions which may not meet the low-cost requirement. This
raises the question of using the PUF with CRPs as the protection against
MA involves a significant increase in complexity compared to the PUF
generating a cryptographic key and a priori unsensitive to MA.
PUF protocol: if the authentication server and the PUF agree on a specific
protocol, the response is not directly obtained from the challenge, thus
thwarting the MA. Many protocols have been proposed. Recent studies
have shown that no protocol is perfectly immune to these attacks
14.5.1.2. Attacks exploiting the helper data
When the PUF generates a cryptographic key or is used as controlled PUF
in an unreliable technology, the HD is absolutely necessary. However, it is a
public word which can be used or manipulated to give rise to powerful
attacks. As the response is not known, the attacker tries to find the
dependency between the HD and the PUF behavior or directly use the
modified key. For instance, in the code-offset method when using ECC, the
HD, or secure sketch, can be simply Xored with another codeword to
change the key and perpetrate related key attacks. The HD can also be used
without manipulation: as the codeword provides redundancy of the PUF, the
knowledge of the code family, the HD and the challenge leaks the PUF
model which can be found by ML. Another simple example is to manipulate
the bits of HD pointed to reliable challenges. If two consecutive bits (only
one being reliable), are swapped in the HD and the PUF behavior is the
same, it can be deduced that the bits are the same. Extending this 2-bit
comparison to all the bits allows the attacker to find the whole response.
Protection against such attacks is crucial. One solution is to store the HD in

a non-writable memory to avoid manipulation, another is to hash it and
combine with the generated key.
14.5.2. Semi-invasive attacks
Side-channel attacks (SCA) are the main class of semi-invasive attacks. A
side-channel can be the power, the electromagnetic radiation, the execution
time or an error probability. They can be used to support the MA, to extract
the response of PUF or to do a profiling attack by SCA. Only strong PUFs
are targeted in both cases. They are generally passive, but some of them can
be active to disturb the internal behavior of the PUF.
Modeling attacks supported by side-channel: the side-channel leakage is a
strong support to MA, especially to target the intermediate results of a
compositions of PUFs where a divide and conquer approach is used. The
error probability is a particularly efficient side-channel as it gives accurate
value of the delay accumulation near the decision threshold of the response
bit. For instance, it has been shown that the XOR arbiter PUF can be
attacked linearly with the number of XORs by taking advantage of the
reliability information. Also, by changing the environment conditions, like
increasing the temperature and thermal noise, the MA based on low
reliability is facilitated.
Direct attack by side-channel: the response of a PUF can directly leak in its
side-channels. This attack is powerful when the response is not directly
accessible like for controlled PUFs or PUFs generating a key. For instance,
the RO-PUF and loop-PUF are prone to EM analysis which can extract the
oscillation frequency, thus the response. An EM probe can also inject
harmonics to lock the internal RO oscillations of PUFs like TRNG based on
ROs. Attacking an arbiter PUF is more difficult as the SNR is very small as
it is a one-shot arbitration, but it can be leveraged by multiple tries.
Profiling attack by side-channel: if the adversary has access to a reference
arbiter-PUF, they can use the storage Flip-Flop for distinguishing the
response and perform a non-invasive “profiling” attacks. They create from
the power traces a reference PUF whose responses can be learned by ML.
Then, ML is used to infer the response of other unknown PUFs, thus giving
rise to Cross-PUF attacks. Profiling attacks can also target associated PUF
processing as ECC, where the code redundancy amplifies the leakage.

Protections against SCA: the protection against MA using power side-
channel can be inspired by those devised for cryptographic
implementations, which could be either hiding or masking the leakage. The
masking method can be temporal to randomize the frequency of ROs, or
spatial, as for instance the use of threshold implementation. Hiding can be
the use of dual-rail logic that makes the power constant. However, the
process mismatch which is the good property to get a PUF can harm the
balance required by the dual-rail logic.
14.5.3. Invasive attacks
The invasive attacks allow the attacker to copy the PUF from the
observation and/or modification of its layout. It requires a preparation phase
to access the PUF and can be destructive. A priori it seems very difficult to
extract the static physical information from PUFs as the technological
dispersion is hardy observable, thus involving the unclonability property.
However, it has been shown that cloning a memory cell can be planned with
sophisticated failure analysis setup. Typically, if the circuit is still
operational, SRAM PUFs are vulnerable to the readout operation by laser
which stimulates the cells. Then, a cloning can be done by using a “Focus
Ion Beam”, which can edit silicon structures. As this attack is sensitive to
noise and is efficient at startup, a countermeasure is to use a reset signal on
SRAM that would be triggered only by the user.
14.6. Characterizations
In this section, some public datasets of measurements are provided for the
reader to have the opportunity to exercise themselves.
14.6.1. Reliability–aging
Reliability and aging estimation requires some datasets where the PUF
outputs a physical quantity, before turning it into bits. Some papers of the
literature provide studies relying on public dataset, along with some python
scripts for further analysis and graphical representations. One method of
reliability analysis for the delay-PUFs is to characterize through repeated
measurements of preselected challenges for a full range of temperatures and
voltages.

14.6.2. Machine learning attacks on challenge–response
protocol
The software pypuf is a toolbox for simulation, testing and attacking PUFs.
It contains datasets (obtained from simulations) and attack codes for the
following strong PUFs:
arbiter PUF-based designs utilizing the additive delay model, including
simulations of the arbiter PUF, XOR arbiter PUF, lightweight secure
PUF, permutation PUF and interpose PUF;
feed-forward arbiter PUFs and XORs;
PUF designs based on bistable rings;
integrated optical PUFs.
14.7. Standardization
14.7.1. International standards
ISO/IEC 20897-1 specifies the security requirements for PUFs. They
concern the output properties, tamper-resistance and unclonability of a
single and a batch of PUFs. It also describes the typical use cases of a PUF.
ISO/IEC DIS 20897-2 specifies the test and evaluation methods for PUFs.
They consist of inspection of the design rationale of the PUF and
comparison between statistical analyses of the responses from a batch of
PUFs or a unique PUF versus specified thresholds.
These standards present a way to categorize the PUFs. The responses from
PUFs and their repetitive calls are arranged into a cube as Figure 14.21
shows. The single small cube describes a 1-bit response from a PUF. The
three axes of the cube and the time are described hereafter as directions:
Direction B: “#bit” shows the bit length of the response obtained from
a single challenge. In a 1-bit response PUF, for example, arbiter PUF,
the dimension B collapses.
Direction C: “#challenge” shows the number of different challenges
given to a PUF. In a no-challenge PUF (or, more rigorously, a one-

challenge PUF like in SRAM PUF), the dimension C collapses.
Direction D: “#PUF” shows the number of different PUF devices
under test.
Direction T: “#query” shows the number of query iterations under the
fixed PUF device and challenge.
Figure 14.21. The four dimensions involved in the PUFs metrics.
14.7.2. Standards requiring PUF
Some market-oriented standards prescribe the use of PUFs. For instance,
EVITA is specifying the requirements for security in automotive
applications. The key security component in an automotive chip is its
“Hardware Security Module” (HSM). Requirements are set on the HSM,
which can be either low, medium and high, depending on the criticality of
the ECU to be protected. It is mandated for EVITA high profile that a PUF
is used for the master key.
14.8. Notes and further references
History: the concept dates back from early 1980s, by the pioneering work of
Bauder (1983) and Simmons (1984, 1991). Naccache and Frémanteau
(1992) provided an authentication scheme in 1992 for memory cards. The
terms POWF (physical one-way function) and PUF (physical unclonable
function) were coined by Pappu (2001) and Gassend et al. (2002a); the
latter publication described the first integrated PUF where, unlike PUFs

based on optics, the measurement circuitry and the PUF are integrated onto
the same electrical circuit (and fabricated on silicon).
PUF types: there have been numerous PUF variants reported so far (Böhm
and Hofer 2012; Basel 2018). Here is an excerpt of technologies taken from
a selection of published academic papers: optical PUF by Pappu (2001),
coating PUF by Tuyls et al. (2007), SRAM PUF by Holcomb et al. (2009),
glitch PUF by Suzuki and Shimizu (2010), arbiter PUF by Pappu et al.
(2002) and Gassend et al. (2002a), ring-oscillator PUF by Suh and Devadas
(2007), loop-PUF by Cherif et al. (2012), memory in logic PUF (MeLPUF)
by Vega et al. (2020), memory contention PUF by Güneysu (2012), oxide
rupture PUF by Wu et al (2018b), transistor voltage threshold by Su et al.
(2008), Via-PUF by ICTK (2021), resistive RAM by Mazady et al. (2015),
TERO by Marchand et al. (2016), etc.
Use cases: a tutorial about PUFs is given in Herder et al. (2014). An
example of key generation is in Maes et al. (2012) and an application to
logic locking in Roy et al. (2008).
Reasons for variability of PUFs: the three main reasons in CMOS are the
density of dopants in the depletion area (Asenov et al. 2001), the thickness
of the insulator below the gate (Asenov et al. 2002) and the line edge
roughness (Asenov et al. 2003).
Properties: desirable properties have been explored since 2012 Maes
(2012). Some of these notions have been analyzed theoretically by
Armknecht et al. (2016). Since then, those properties have made their way
to practical implementations (Danger et al. 2016). It is expected that the
reliability remains good enough, across PVTA (process voltage temperature
aging) corners of the PUF (Anik et al. 2021). Experiments can be carried
out to quantify the reliability (Katzenbeisser et al. 2012). Besides, aging can
also be taken into account (Karimi et al. 2016, 2017, 2018). Postprocessing
with error correction codes (ECC) to build a fuzzy extraction is proposed by
Dodis et al. (2004). Some implementation examples are given in Bösch et
al. (2008); Maes et al. (2009, 2012). Proactive selection of challenges are
presented in Hofer and Böhm (2010); Suh and Devadas (2007), where
unreliable changes are discarded; some technologies that provides native
stability can be found in Wu et al. (2018a); Liu et al. (2016); Chuang et al.
(2019).

Architectures: a comprehensive list of VLSI PUFs is maintained by the
National University of Singapore (National University of Singapore –
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Faculty of Engineering
(Massimo Alioto 2021). This database contains performance indications and
also security information.
Reliability: the work from Maes (2013) introduces a model of reliability in
memory PUF. The reliability of RO-PUFs and loop-PUFs is studied by
Schaub et al. (2018, 2020a). The two-metrics approach to enhance
reliability in multi-bin PUFs is presented in Danger et al. (2019).
Entropy: the entropy of a PUF can be modeled as a function of the
technological dispersion as shown in Pelgrom et al. (1989). PUF are biased
already at their architecture as shown in Sahoo et al. (2016). The number of
challenges is exponential in the size of the PUF, but the entropy is not
scaling as fast (Ganji et al. 2016). Such exercise is carried out in the study
by Schaub et al. (2020b). The min-entropy is assessed for some PUFs in
Delvaux et al. (2016). The underlying question is the relationship between
the number of challenges and the obtained entropy as discussed in Schaub
et al. (2020b).
Attacks: in Rührmair et al. (2010), modeling attacks have been carried out
on many PUF types. A study about composed PUFs is given in Sahoo et al.
(2014). The ML attack on Interpose-PUF is presented in Wisiol et al.
(2020). Attacks on helper data are presented in Delvaux (2017). The
controlled PUF is introduced in Gassend et al. (2002b). Delvaux et al.
(2015) gives a survey of PUF protocols. A recent attack by using helper
data without manipulation and MA is presented in Strieder et al. (2021).
Modeling attacks using physical side-channel are presented in Delvaux and
Verbauwhede (2013); Becker and Kumar (2014); Rührmair et al. (2014);
Becker (2015). Direct side-channel attacks with EM analysis is presented in
Merli et al. (2011); Tebelmann et al. (2020, 2021). The cross-PUF profiling
attack is presented in Kroeger et al. (2020a). Template side-channel attacks
exploiting the ECC block is described in Karakoyunlu and Sunar (2010).
Readout attacks of logic states with a laser are accounted for in Nedospasov
et al. (2013).
Characterizations: the dataset corresponding to Schaub et al. (2018) allows
us to characterize the reliability of the PUF through repeated measurements.

The simulations used to support the study of aging on arbiter PUF in
Kroeger et al. (2020b) are available as a public dataset. The toolbox pypuf
(Wisiol et al. 2021) allows the simulation and test of security against
modeling attacks. An overview of tests for PUFs with multi-bin responses is
presented in Anik et al. (2023).
Standardization ISO/IEC 20897-1 (ISO/IEC 2020) specifies the security
requirements for PUFs along with the description of typical use cases.
ISO/IEC DIS 20897-2 (ISO/IEC 2022) specifies the test and evaluation
methods for PUFs. EVITA (FP7 European Project 2020) is a standard for
automotive applications that prescribes the use of PUF for security.
14.9. References
Alioto, M. (2021). Physically Unclonable Function database. Thesis,
National University of Singapore [Online]. Available at:
http://www.green-ic.org/hwsecdb.
Anik, M.T.H., Danger, J., Diankha, O., Ebrahimabadi, M., Frisch, C.,
Guilley, S., Karimi, N., Pehl, M., Takarabt, S. (2021). Testing and
reliability enhancement of security primitives. In 36th IEEE
International Symposium on Defect and Fault Tolerance in VLSI and
Nanotechnology Systems, DFT 2021, Dilillo, L., Cassano, L.,
Papadimitriou, A. (eds). IEEE, Athens. doi:
10.1109/DFT52944.2021.9568297.
Anik, M.T.H., Danger, J.-L., Diankha, O., Ebrahimabadi, M., Frisch, C.,
Guilley, S., Karimi, N., Pehl, M., Takarabt, S. (2023). Testing and
reliability enhancement of security primitives: Methodology and
experimental validation. Microelectronics Reliability, 147, 115055.
Armknecht, F., Moriyama, D., Sadeghi, A., Yung, M. (2016). Towards a
unified security model for physically unclonable functions. In Topics in
Cryptology – CT-RSA 2016 – The Cryptographers’ Track at the RSA
Conference 2016, Sako, K. (ed.). Springer, Heidelberg. doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-29485-8_16.
Asenov, A., Slavcheva, G., Brown, A.R., Davies, J.H., Saini, S. (2001).
Increase in the random dopant induced threshold fluctuations and

lowering in sub-100 nm MOSFETs due to quantum effects: A 3-D
density-gradient simulation study. IEEE Transactions on Electron
Devices, 48(4), 722–729.
Asenov, A., Kaya, S., Davies, J.H. (2002). Intrinsic threshold voltage
fluctuations in decanano MOSFETs due to local oxide thickness
variations. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, 49(1), 112–119.
Asenov, A., Kaya, S., Brown, A.R. (2003). Intrinsic parameter fluctuations
in decananometer MOSFETs introduced by gate line edge roughness.
IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, 50(5), 1254–1260.
Basel, H. (2018). Physically Unclonable Functions – From Basic Design
Principles to Advanced Hardware Security Applications. Springer,
Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-76804-5.
Bauder, D. (1983). An anti-counterfeiting concept for currency systems.
Research Report PTK-11990, Sandia National Labs, Albuquerque.
Becker, G.T. (2015). The gap between promise and reality: On the
insecurity of xor arbiter pufs. In International Workshop on
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems. Springer, Heidelberg.
Becker, G.T. and Kumar, R. (2014). Active and passive side-channel attacks
on delay based PUF designs. IACR Cryptology Archive, 287 [Online].
Available at: https://eprint.iacr.org/2014/287.
Böhm, C. and Hofer, M. (2012). Physical Unclonable Functions in Theory
and Practice. Springer, Heidelberg.
Bösch, C., Guajardo, J., Sadeghi, A.-R., Shokrollahi, J., Tuyls, P. (2008).
Efficient helper data key extractor on FPGAs. In International Workshop
on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems. Springer,
Heidelberg.
Cherif, Z., Danger, J.-L., Guilley, S., Bossuet, L. (2012). An easy-to-design
PUF based on a single oscillator: The loop PUF. In Digital System
Design (DSD), Izmir. IEEE.
Chuang, K.-H., Bury, E., Degraeve, R., Kaczer, B., Linten, D.,
Verbauwhede, I. (2019). A physically unclonable function using soft

oxide breakdown featuring 0% native BER and 51.8 fJ/bit in 40-nm
CMOS. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 54(10), 2765–2776.
Danger, J.-L., Guilley, S., Nguyen, P., Rioul, O. (2016). PUFs:
Standardization and evaluation. In Proc. 2nd IEEE Workshop on Mobile
System Technologies. Milan.
Danger, J.-L., Guilley, S., Schaub, A. (2019). Two-metric helper data for
highly robust and secure delay PUFs. In IEEE 8th International
Workshop on Advances in Sensors and Interfaces, IWASI 2019. Otranto.
doi: 10.1109/IWASI.2019.8791249.
Delvaux, J. (2017). Security analysis of PUF-based key generation and
entity authentication. PhD Thesis, KU Leuven, Leuven.
Delvaux, J. and Verbauwhede, I. (2013). Side channel modeling attacks on
65nm arbiter PUFs exploiting CMOS device noise. In 2013 IEEE
International Symposium on Hardware-Oriented Security and Trust,
HOST 2013. Austin. doi: 10.1109/HST.2013.6581579.
Delvaux, J., Peeters, R., Gu, D., Verbauwhede, I. (2015). A survey on
lightweight entity authentication with strong PUFs. ACM Comput. Surv.,
48(2), 26. doi: 10.1145/2818186.
Delvaux, J., Gu, D., Verbauwhede, I. (2016). Upper bounds on the min-
entropy of RO Sum, Arbiter, Feed-forward arbiter, and S-ArbRO PUFs.
In Asian Hardware Oriented Security and Trust Symposium. IEEE.
Dodis, Y., Reyzin, L., Smith, A. (2004). Fuzzy extractors: How to generate
strong keys from biometrics and other noisy data. In EUROCRYPT.
Springer, Heidelberg.
FP7 European Project (2020). E-safety vehicle intrusion protecTed
applications (EVITA) [Online]. Available at: https://www.evita-
project.org/.
Ganji, F., Tajik, S., Seifert, J. (2016). PAC learning of arbiter PUFs. J.
Cryptographic Engineering, 6(3), 249–258. doi: 10.1007/s13389-016-
0119-4.

Gassend, B., Clarke, D.E., van Dijk, M., Devadas, S. (2002a). Silicon
physical random functions. In Proceedings of the 9th, CCS 2002, Atluri,
V. (ed.). ACM, Washington, D.C. doi: 10.1145/586110.586132.
Gassend, B., Clarke, D., van Dijk, M., Devadas, S. (2002b). Controlled
physical random functions. In Proceedings 18th Annual Computer
Security Applications Conference, 2002. IEEE, Las Vegas.
Güneysu, T. (2012). Using data contention in dual-ported memories for
security applications. Signal Processing Systems, 67(1), 15–29.
Herder, C., Yu, M., Koushanfar, F., Devadas, S. (2014). Physical unclonable
functions and applications: A tutorial. Proceedings of the IEEE, 102(8),
1126–1141.
Hofer, M. and Böhm, C. (2010). An alternative to error correction for
SRAM-Like PUFs. In CHES 2010, Mangard, S. and Standaert, F.-X.
(eds). Springer, Santa Barbara. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-15031-9_23.
Holcomb, D.E., Burleson, W.P., Fu, K. (2009). Power-up SRAM state as an
identifying fingerprint and source of true random numbers. IEEE Trans.
Computers, 58(9), 1198–1210. doi: 10.1109/TC.2008.212.
ICTK (2021). VIA PUF [Online]. Available at: https://ictk.com/VIAPUFIP.
ISO/IEC (2020). ISO/IEC 20897-1. Information security, cybersecurity and
privacy protection – Physically unclonable functions – Part 1: Security
requirements [Online]. Available at:
https://www.iso.org/standard/76353.html.
ISO/IEC (2022). ISO/IEC 20897-2. Information security, cybersecurity and
privacy protection – Physically unclonable functions – Part 2: Test and
evaluation methods [Online]. Available at:
https://www.iso.org/standard/76354.html.
Karakoyunlu, D. and Sunar, B. (2010). Differential template attacks on PUF
enabled cryptographic devices. In 2010 IEEE International Workshop on
Information Forensics and Security. Seattle.
Karimi, N., Danger, J.-L., Lozach, F., Guilley, S. (2016). Predictive aging of
reliability of two delay PUFs. In Security, Privacy, and Applied

Cryptography Engineering – 6th International Conference, SPACE
2016, Carlet, C., Hasan, M.A., Saraswat, V. (eds). Springer, Heidelberg.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-49445-6_12.
Karimi, N., Danger, J.-L., Slimani, M., Guilley, S. (2017). Impact of the
switching activity on the aging of delay-PUFs. In 22nd IEEE European
Test Symposium, ETS 2017. Limassol. doi: 10.1109/ETS.2017.7968223.
Karimi, N., Danger, J.-L., Guilley, S. (2018). Impact of aging on the
reliability of delay PUFs. J. Electronic Testing, 34(5), 571–586. doi:
10.1007/s10836-018-5745-6.
Katzenbeisser, S., Kocabaş, U., Rožić, V., Sadeghi, A.-R., Verbauwhede, I.,
Wachsmann, C. (2012). PUFs: Myth, fact or busted? A security
evaluation of physically unclonable functions (PUFs) cast in silicon. In
CHES 2012. Springer, Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-33027-8_17.
Kroeger, T., Cheng, W., Guilley, S., Danger, J.-L., Karimi, N. (2020a).
Cross-PUF attacks on arbiter-PUFs through their power side-channel. In
IEEE International Test Conference, ITC 2020. Washington, D.C. doi:
10.1109/ITC44778.2020.9325241.
Kroeger, T., Cheng, W., Guilley, S., Danger, J.-L., Karimi, N. (2020b).
Effect of aging on PUF modeling attacks based on power side-channel
observations. In 2020 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference
& Exhibition, DATE 2020. IEEE, Grenoble. doi:
10.23919/DATE48585.2020.9116428.
Liu, R., Wu, H., Pang, Y., Qian, H., Yu, S. (2016). A highly reliable and
tamper-resistant RRAM PUF: Design and experimental validation. In
2016 IEEE International Symposium on Hardware Oriented Security
and Trust (HOST).
Maes, R. (2012). Physically unclonable functions: Constructions, properties
and applications. PhD Thesis, KU Leuven.
Maes, R. (2013). An accurate probabilistic reliability model for silicon
PUFs. In International Conference on Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems. Springer, Heidelberg.

Maes, R., Tuyls, P., Verbauwhede, I. (2009). A soft decision helper data
algorithm for SRAM PUFs. In 2009 IEEE International Symposium on
Information Theory.
Maes, R., Van Herrewege, A., Verbauwhede, I. (2012). PUFKY: A fully
functional PUF-based cryptographic key generator. In Proceedings of the
14th International Conference on Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems, CHES’12. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg. doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-33027-8_18.
Marchand, C., Bossuet, L., Cherkaoui, A. (2016). Design and
characterization of the TERO-PUF on SRAM FPGAs. In IEEE
Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI, ISVLSI 2016. Pittsburgh.
doi: 10.1109/ISVLSI.2016.18.
Mazady, A., Rahman, M.T., Forte, D., Anwar, M. (2015). Memristor PUF –
A security primitive: Theory and experiment. IEEE J. Emerg. Sel. Topics
Circuits Syst., 5(2), 222–229. doi: 10.1109/JETCAS.2015.2435532.
Merli, D., Schuster, D., Stumpf, F., Sigl, G. (2011). Semi-invasive EM
attack on FPGA RO PUFs and countermeasures. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Embedded Systems Security. ACM, New York.
Naccache, D. and Frémanteau, P. (1992). Unforgeable identification device,
identification device reader and method of identification. Patent,
European Patent Office, EP0583709B1.
National University of Singapore – Department of Electrical & Computer
Engineering, Faculty of Engineering (Massimo Alioto) (2021).
Physically unclonable function database. Green IC [Online]. Available
at: http://www.green-ic.org/hwsecdb.
Nedospasov, D., Seifert, J., Helfmeier, C., Boit, C. (2013). Invasive PUF
analysis. In 2013 Workshop on Fault Diagnosis and Tolerance in
Cryptography, Fischer, W. and Schmidt, J.-M. (eds). IEEE, Los
Alamitos. doi: 10.1109/FDTC.2013.19.
Pappu, R.S. (2001). Physical one-way functions. PhD Thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Pappu, R.S., Recht, B., Taylor, J., Gershenfeld, N. (2002). Physical one-way
functions. Science, 297(5589), 2026–2030. doi:
10.1126/science.1074376.
Pelgrom, M.J., Duinmaijer, A.C., Welbers, A.P. (1989). Matching properties
of MOS transistors. IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, 24(5), 1433–
1439. doi: 10.1109/JSSC.1989.572629.
Roy, J.A., Koushanfar, F., Markov, I.L. (2008). EPIC: Ending piracy of
integrated circuits. In DATE. IEEE.
Rührmair, U., Sehnke, F., Sölter, J., Dror, G., Devadas, S., Schmidhuber, J.
(2010). Modeling attacks on physical unclonable functions. In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer and
Communications Security. ACM, New York.
Rührmair, U., Xu, X., Sölter, J., Mahmoud, A., Majzoobi, M., Koushanfar,
F., Burleson, W.P. (2014). Efficient power and timing side channels for
physical unclonable functions. In Cryptographic Hardware and
Embedded Systems – CHES 2014 – 16th International Workshop, Batina
L. and Robshaw, M. (eds). Springer, Busan. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-
44709-3_26.
Sahoo, D.P., Saha, S., Mukhopadhyay, D., Chakraborty, R.S., Kapoor, H.
(2014). Composite PUF: A new design paradigm for physically
unclonable functions on FPGA. In 2014 IEEE International Symposium
on Hardware-Oriented Security and Trust. Arlington. doi:
10.1109/HST.2014.6855567.
Sahoo, D.P., Nguyen, P.H., Chakraborty, R.S., Mukhopadhyay, D. (2016).
Architectural bias: A novel statistical metric to evaluate arbiter PUF
variants. Report 2016/057, Cryptology ePrint Archive [Online].
Available at: http://eprint.iacr.org/2016/057.
Schaub, A., Danger, J.-L., Guilley, S., Rioul, O. (2018). An improved
analysis of reliability and entropy for delay PUFs. In 21st Euromicro
Conference on Digital System Design, DSD 2018, Novotný, M.,
Konofaos, N., Skavhaug, A. (eds). IEEE Computer Society, Prague. doi:
10.1109/DSD.2018.00096.

Schaub, A., Danger, J.-L., Rioul, O., Guilley, S. (2020a). The big picture of
delay-PUF dependability. In European Conference on Circuit Theory
and Design, ECCTD 2020. IEEE, Sofia. doi:
10.1109/ECCTD49232.2020.9218396.
Schaub, A., Rioul, O., Danger, J.-L., Guilley, S., Boutros, J. (2020b).
Challenge codes for physically unclonable functions with Gaussian
delays: A maximum entropy problem. Adv. Math. Commun., 14(3), 491–
505. doi: 10.3934/amc.2020060.
Simmons, G. (1984). A system for verifying user identity and authorization
at the point-of-sale or access. Cryptologia, 8, 1–21.
Simmons, G. (1991). Identification of data, devices, documents and
individuals. In IEEE International Carnahan Conference on Security
Technology. Taipei.
Strieder, E., Frisch, C., Pehl, M. (2021). Machine learning of physical
unclonable functions using helper data: Revealing a pitfall in the fuzzy
commitment scheme. IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware
and Embedded Systems, 2021(2), 1–36.
Su, Y., Holleman, J., Otis, B.P. (2008). A digital 1.6 pJ/bit chip
identification circuit using process variations. IEEE Journal of Solid-
State Circuits, 43(1), 69–77.
Suh, G.E. and Devadas, S. (2007). Physical unclonable functions for device
authentication and secret key generation. In Proceedings of the 44th
Design Automation Conference, DAC 2007. IEEE, San Diego. doi:
10.1145/1278480.1278484.
Suzuki, D. and Shimizu, K. (2010). The glitch PUF: A new delay-PUF
architecture exploiting glitch shapes. In CHES. Springer, Heidelberg.
Tebelmann, L., Danger, J.-L., Pehl, M. (2020). Self-secured PUF:
Protecting the loop PUF by masking. In Constructive Side-Channel
Analysis and Secure Design – 11th International Workshop, COSADE
2020, Bertoni, G.M. and Regazzoni, F. (eds). Springer, Lugano. doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-68773-1_14.

Tebelmann, L., Kühne, U., Danger, J., Pehl, M. (2021). Analysis and
protection of the two-metric helper data scheme. In Constructive Side-
Channel Analysis and Secure Design – 12th International Workshop,
COSADE 2021, Bhasin, S. and Santis, F.D. (eds). Springer, Lugano. doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-89915-8_13.
Tuyls, P., Skoric, B., Kevenaar, T. (2007). Security with Noisy Data: Private
Biometrics, Secure Key Storage and Anti-Counterfeiting, 1st edition.
Springer, London.
Vega, C., SLPSK, P., Paul, S.D., Bhunia, S. (2020). MeLPUF: Memory in
logic PUF. arXiv [Online]. Available at:
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2012.03162v1.
Wisiol, N., Mühl, C., Pirnay, N., Nguyen, P.H., Margraf, M., Seifert, J., van
Dijk, M., Rührmair, U. (2020). Splitting the interpose PUF: A novel
modeling attack strategy. IACR Trans. Cryptogr. Hardw. Embed. Syst.,
2020(3), 97–120. doi: 10.13154/tches.v2020.i3.97-120.
Wisiol, N., Gräbnitz, C., Mühl, C., Zengin, B., Soroceanu, T., Pirnay, N.,
Mursi, K.T. (2021). pypuf: Cryptanalysis of physically unclonable
functions. GitHub. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3901410.
Wu, M.-Y., Yang, T.-H., Chen, L.-C., Lin, C.-C., Hu, H.-C., Su, F.-Y.,
Wang, C.-M., Huang, J.P.-H., Chen, H.-M., Lu, C.C.-H. et al. (2018a). A
PUF scheme using competing oxide rupture with bit error rate
approaching zero. In 2018 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits
Conference-(ISSCC).
Wu, M., Yang, T., Chen, L., Lin, C., Hu, H., Su, F., Wang, C., Huang, J.P.,
Chen, H., Lu, C.C. et al. (2018b). A PUF scheme using competing oxide
rupture with bit error rate approaching zero. In 2018 IEEE International
Solid-State Circuits Conference, ISSCC 2018. San Francisco. doi:
10.1109/ISSCC.2018.8310218.
OceanofPDF.com

List of Authors
Lejla BATINA
Radboud University
Nijmegen
Netherlands
Sonia BELAÏD
CryptoExperts
Paris
France
Begül BILGIN
Rambus Cryptography Research
Rotterdam
Netherlands
Łukasz CHMIELEWSKI
Radboud University
Nijmegen
Netherlands
and
Masaryk University
Czechia
Jean-Sébastien CORON
University of Luxembourg
Luxembourg
Pedro Maat COSTA MASSOLINO
PQShield
Oxford
United Kingdom
Jean-Luc DANGER
Télécom Paris
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
France

Sylvain GUILLEY
Secure-IC S.A.S.
Cesson-Sévigné
France
Matthias J. KANNWISCHER
Chelpis Quantum Corp
Taipei
Taiwan
Ange MARTINELLI
Agence nationale de la sécurité des
systèmes d'information
Paris
France
Nele MENTENS
Leiden University
Netherlands
and
KU Leuven
Belgium
Lauren DE MEYER
Rambus Cryptography Research
San Francisco
USA
Debdeep MUKHOPADHYAY
Indian Institute of Technology
Kharagpur
India
Ruben NIEDERHAGEN
Academia Sinica
Taipei
Taiwan
and
University of Southern Denmark

Odense
Denmark
Colin O’FLYNN
Dalhousie University
and
NewAE Technology Inc
Halifax
Canada
Louiza PAPACHRISTODOULOU
Fontys University of Applied Sciences
Eindhoven
Netherlands
Thomas PORNIN
NCC Group
Canada
Emmanuel PROUFF
LIP6
Sorbonne Université
Paris
France
Guénaël RENAULT
Agence nationale de la sécurité des
systèmes d’information
Paris
France
Matthieu RIVAIN
CryptoExperts
Paris
France
Francisco RODRÍGUEZ-HENRÍQUEZ
Cryptography Research Center
Technology Innovation Institute
Abu Dhabi
United Arab Emirates

Franck RONDEPIERRE
Agence nationale de la sécurité des
systèmes d’information
Paris
France
Mélissa ROSSI
Agence nationale de la sécurité des
systèmes d’information
Paris
France
Mylène ROUSSELLET
Thales DIS
France
Ulrich RUHRMAIR
LMU Physics Department
Ludwig Maximilian
University of Munich
Germany
Peter SCHWABE
Max Planck Institute for
Security and Privacy
Bochum
Germany
and
Radboud University
Nijmegen
Netherlands
Sergei SKOROBOGATOV
Cambridge Research and Engineering
United Kingdom
Abdul Rahman TALEB
CryptoExperts
Paris
France

Yannick TEGLIA
Thales DIS
France
David VIGILANT
Thales DIS
France
Rina ZEITOUN
Cryptography & Security Labs
IDEMIA
Courbevoie
France
OceanofPDF.com

Index
1 among N, 178–180
A, B
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), 6, 15, 21, 27, 35, 45, 53, 54, 117,
118, 127, 140, 155, 160–163, 177–183, 188–195, 197, 198
aging, 343, 353, 357, 364, 367, 368
algorithm(s)
double-and-add, 172, 173, 228
left-to-right double-and-always-add, 229
regular, 230, 231, 237
square-and-multiply algorithm, 167, 172
application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC), 116, 123
ARM Cortex, 141, 154, 227, 268

attack(s)
active, 8
address-bit side channel, 226, 238, 239, 242, 244
Bellcore, 204–206, 210, 212, 215, 219
Big Mac, 209, 217
chosen-ciphertext (CCA), 256, 257, 263, 264, 266, 276, 277
chosen-plaintext (CPA), 263–265, 272, 274
horizontal, 209, 210, 217
invasive, 295–299, 301, 312, 361, 363, 364
passive, 344
power analysis, 4, 144, 312
probing, 299, 312
safe-error, 208, 217, 230, 241, 243, 299
semi-invasive, 297–299, 361, 363
template, 226, 234, 235
timing, 133–135, 140, 144–146, 216, 251, 256, 271, 296
ZEMD, 207
zero-value, 237
Barret reduction, 120, 122, 127
bit error rate (BER), 343, 346, 353, 356–358
bitslicing, 159–162, 258, 271
block cipher(s), 126, 128, 142, 160, 162, 178, 195, 238

C, D
cache
line, 134, 140, 143, 144
memory, 133, 134
chemical deprocessing, 303
chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP), 299, 303, 305, 306
Chinese remainder theorem (CRT), 122–124, 127
circuit compiler(s), 61, 62, 78
Classic McEliece, 256–259, 264, 276 code-based
KEMs, 256, 265
masking(s), 8–10, 13
compilation, 146, 147, 149
composition, 60, 74–78, 80, 81, 87, 90, 94, 103
coordinates
point, 171, 172, 226
projective, 236, 237, 244
correlation(s), 208–210, 218, 234, 238, 315, 320
countermeasure, 3–5, 11, 15, 18, 21–24, 26, 27, 35, 36, 108, 178, 180, 195,
202–214, 216–219, 226–228, 230, 233, 234, 236–238, 240–245, 256, 259,
263, 265, 275, 315, 316, 331, 344, 364
CRYSTALS-
Dilithium, 250
Kyber, 125, 250
CSWAP function, 233
data dependencies, 140
decapsulation, 294, 297, 299, 311

delayering, 303, 306
differential
fault attacks (DFA), 269, 316, 317, 332
power analysis (DPA), 3, 7, 134, 135, 205, 207, 216, 217, 226, 230, 234,
239, 242, 271, 328
divided backend duplication, 324–326, 333
dummy, 208–210, 216–218
E, F
early evaluation effect, 327
elliptic curve cryptography (ECC), 118, 119, 121–125, 128, 163, 225–228,
231, 234, 236, 241–245
entropy, 44, 138, 235, 320, 343, 351, 352, 356–361, 367
loss, 359, 360
epoxy, 292, 293, 311
error correcting code (ECC), 348, 353, 354, 357, 363, 364, 367, 368
execution pipeline, 138
exponent blinding, 11, 208
exponentiation atomicity, 206
failure set(s), 84, 89–92, 98–102, 105, 107
Falcon, 250, 266, 277
Fiat–Shamir-with-aborts, 266
field-programmable gate array (FPGA), 116, 117
focused ion beam (FIB), 300, 302, 305, 306
Fujisaki–Okamoto transform, 264, 277
fuzzy extraction, 354, 367

G, H
gadget(s), 4, 60–63, 65–69, 72–81, 87, 90, 94–98
glitch(es), 40–43, 47–50, 53, 54, 317–323, 325–328, 331
-extended probes, 41, 48–50, 53
hardware
cloning, 309
dependence, 134
hash-and-sign, 266
hash-based signature, 250, 266, 272–275, 278
helper data, 346, 355, 359, 362, 368
hidden field equations (HFE), 269, 270, 277
I, J
IND-
CCA1, 264
CCA2, 263, 264
integrity
key, 180, 195, 213
result, 179
Ishai, Sahai and Wagner (ISW) scheme, 16
multiplication, 184–187
Jacobian representation, 237
JTAG, 295, 309
jump prediction, 144–146

K, L
key-encapsulation mechanism(s), 249, 250, 263
lattice-based
key-encapsulation mechanism, 250
signature scheme(s), 250
leakage, 39, 83, 84, 87, 107, 108, 138, 157, 178, 191, 207, 216, 226, 229,
237–240, 244, 265, 315, 322, 329, 331, 356, 359, 360, 363, 364
rate, 71
squeezing (LS), 7, 8
learning-with-errors (LWE), 251
learning-with-rounding (LWR), 251
logic
asynchronous, 330, 333
balanced cell-based differential (BCDL), 323, 332, 333
bitwise Boolean, 149, 150
dual-rail random switching (DRSL), 319–323, 331–333
masked dual-rail with precharge (MDPL), 319, 322, 323, 331–333
MOS current mode (MCML), 329, 333
secure triple track (STTL), 323, 331–333
sense amplifier-based (SABL), 328, 333
wave dynamic differential (WDDL), 318, 319, 323–325, 327–329, 331–
333
look-up table (LUT), 35, 117, 161, 187, 329

M, N
mask(s)
conversions, 27
refreshing, 16, 18, 22, 24, 25, 29, 35, 184, 186, 198
masking, 83, 90, 92, 94, 134, 160, 189, 226, 236, 238, 323, 331, 364
arithmetic, 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 27, 28, 30, 33, 34, 36
Boolean, 5, 7, 8, 11, 15, 27, 30, 31, 33
high-order, 24, 28, 35
multiplicative, 6, 7, 10, 13, 226
orthogonal direct sum, 8
polynomial, 6, 8, 48, 54
memory dump, 309
message randomization, 210, 217
microcode, 139
mixed radix system (MRS), 122, 123
model(s), 4, 5, 36, 39–41, 43, 53, 134, 135, 139, 140, 144, 145, 147, 183,
191, 219, 262, 315, 321, 331
noisy leakage, 5, 59, 60, 70, 71, 81, 83
probing, 4, 5, 11, 39, 40, 43, 60, 62, 65–74, 77, 81, 83, 84, 97, 98, 102,
104, 105, 108, 109
random, 5, 60, 70–73, 77, 81, 83, 84, 97, 98, 102, 105, 108, 109
robust, 60, 67–69, 77, 83, 108
stochastic, 357, 358
modular arithmetic(s), 118, 123, 125, 133
module-learning-with-errors (MLWE), 252, 266

Montgomery
arithmetic, 128
ladder, 174, 231–233, 237, 240, 262
modular multiplication (MMM), 119, 120
multiplication(s), 120, 123, 124, 127, 164, 165, 169, 254, 255, 268
Power Ladder (MPL), 230, 239, 244
Powering Ladder, 206, 207, 211, 216–218
reduction, 119, 120, 122, 165, 206
multivariate-quadratic-based signature, 269
mutual information, 71, 244
netlist, 307–309, 312
noise(s), 4–6, 67, 70, 73, 77, 134, 207, 252, 253, 255, 256, 342, 343, 346,
347, 353, 357, 358, 363, 364
non-completeness, 41–43, 46–54
NTRUSign, 266, 277
number-theoretic transform (NTT), 125, 253–256, 267, 268, 275
P
physical source(s), 343, 353
pipeline depth, 139, 140
points of interest, 295
poisoning, 209, 217
power
analysis, 144, 167, 206, 226, 229, 296, 312
consumption, 67, 124, 217, 234, 236, 265, 328, 329
prediction, 237

probe(s), 66–69, 71, 74, 80
PUF(s)
arbiter, 350–352, 359, 362, 363, 365, 366, 368
ring-based, 351, 352
SRAM, 347–349, 354, 357, 364–366
strong, 344, 345, 347, 350, 357–359, 361–363, 365
weak, 344–348, 357–359, 361
pypuf, 365, 368
Q, R
quantization, 342, 352
random probing composability, 77, 81, 102, 103
randomized arithmetic circuit, 60–65, 68, 70–72, 75, 76, 78, 80, 84–86, 89,
93, 99, 109
rejection sampling, 135–138, 252, 267, 268
reproducibility, 343
residue number system (RNS), 122, 123, 127, 234, 244
reverse engineering, 291, 295, 299, 303, 308–310, 312
RISC, 138, 139, 147
RSA, 11, 118, 119, 121–125, 128, 133, 155, 161, 163, 166, 170, 225, 249,
256
-CRT, 202–205, 207, 208, 211–213, 215, 216, 218, 219
S, T
S-box(es), 21–26, 35, 36, 45, 51–54, 116–118, 127, 155, 162

scalar
multiplication, 225, 226, 228–232, 234–244, 262
randomization, 234, 235, 238, 244, 245
XOR-split, 239, 240
scanning electron microscope (SEM), 302, 303, 307, 308, 311, 312
secure table lookup, 183
security
first-order, 43, 46, 53
noisy leakage, 71
probing, 62, 63, 65, 66, 68, 71–75, 79, 86, 88, 93, 94, 100, 102, 103, 105,
107
random, 71–73, 79, 102, 103, 105–107
sharing(s), 3, 4, 6, 16, 18, 25, 42–47, 49, 50, 52–54, 60–62, 65, 75, 76, 78,
79, 182, 256
additive, 61, 62
signal-to-noise ratio, 73, 210, 357
SIKE, 126, 260–263, 277
speculative execution, 139
SPHINCS+, 250, 266, 272–275, 278
staining, 306, 310, 312
strong non-interference (SNI), 35, 75, 76, 81, 84, 88, 90, 91, 98, 100
supersingular fixed-degree isogeny path (SIPFD), 260, 263
Supersingular Isogeny-based Diffie-Hellman (SIDH), 260, 262, 263, 277
tamper evident, 343
technological bias, 318, 331
thinning, 299, 300, 304
threshold implementation(s), 43, 46, 49, 50, 53, 54, 198, 364

U, W
unclonability, 361, 364, 365
unicity, 343
unpredictability, 344, 358
white box, 183, 198
Winternitz one-time signature scheme (WOTS), 272–274
X
X25519 elliptic-curve, 231
XMSS, 272, 273, 275, 278
OceanofPDF.com

Summary of Volume 1
Preface
Emmanuel PROUFF, Guénaël RENAULT, Matthieu RIVAIN and
Colin O’FLYNN
Part 1. Software Side-Channel Attacks
Chapter 1. Timing Attacks
Daniel PAGE
1.1. Foundations
1.1.1. Execution latency in theory
1.1.2. Execution latency in practice
1.1.3. Attacks that exploit data-dependent execution latency
1.2. Example attacks
1.2.1. Example 1.1: an explanatory attack on password
validation
1.2.2. Example 1.2: an attack on xtime-based AES
1.2.3. Example 1.3: an attack on Montgomery-based RSA
1.2.4. Example 1.4: a padding oracle attack on AES-CBC
1.3. Example mitigations
1.4. Notes and further references
1.5. References
Chapter 2. Microarchitectural Attacks
Yuval YAROM
2.1. Background
2.1.1. Memory caches
2.1.2. Cache hierarchies
2.1.3. Out-of-order execution

2.1.4. Branch prediction
2.1.5. Other caches
2.2. The Prime+Probe attack
2.2.1. Prime+Probe on the L1 data cache
2.2.2. Attacking T-table AES
2.2.3. Prime+probe on the LLC
2.2.4. Variants of Prime+Probe
2.3. The Flush+Reload attack
2.3.1. Attack technique
2.3.2. Attacking square-and-multiply exponentiation
2.3.3. Attack variants
2.3.4. Performance degradation attacks
2.4. Attacking other microarchitectural components
2.4.1. Instruction cache
2.4.2. Branch prediction
2.5. Constant-time programming
2.5.1. Constant-time select
2.5.2. Eliminating secret-dependent branches
2.5.3. Eliminating secret-dependent memory access
2.6. Covert channels
2.7. Transient-execution attacks
2.7.1. The Spectre attack
2.7.2. Meltdown-type attacks
2.8. Summary
2.9. Notes and further references
2.10. References

Part 2. Hardware Side-Channel Attacks
Chapter 3. Leakage and Attack Tools
Davide BELLIZIA and Adrian THILLARD
3.1. Introduction
3.2. Data-dependent physical emissions
3.2.1. Dynamic power
3.2.2. Static power
3.2.3. Electro-magnetic emissions
3.2.4. Other sources of physical leakages
3.3. Measuring a side-channel
3.3.1. Power analysis setup
3.3.2. Probes and probing methodologies
3.4. Leakage modeling
3.4.1. Mathematical modeling
3.4.2. Signal-to-noise ratio
3.4.3. Open source boards
3.4.4. Open source libraries for attacks
3.5. Notes and further references
3.6. References
Chapter 4. Supervised Attacks
Eleonora CAGLI and Loïc MASURE
4.1. General framework
4.1.1. The profiling ability: a powerful threat model
4.1.2. Maximum likelihood distinguisher
4.2. Building a model
4.2.1. Generative model via Gaussian templates
4.2.2. Discriminative model via logistic regression

4.2.3. From logistic regression to neural networks
4.3. Controlling the dimensionality
4.3.1. Points of interest selection with signal-to-noise ratio
4.3.2. Fisher’s linear discriminant analysis
4.4. Building de-synchronization-resistant models
4.5. Summary of the chapter
4.6. Notes and further references
4.7. References
Chapter 5. Unsupervised Attacks
Cécile DUMAS
5.1. Introduction
5.1.1. Supervised attacks
5.1.2. Unsupervised attacks
5.1.3. How to attack without profiling?
5.2. Distinguishers
5.3. Likelihood distinguisher
5.3.1. Distinguisher definition
5.3.2. Determining Gaussian model parameters
5.3.3. Linear leakage model for sensitive data
5.3.4. Linear leakage model for sensitive data bits
5.3.5. Conclusion
5.4. Mutual information
5.4.1. Information theory
5.4.2. Distinguisher
5.4.3. Bijectivity
5.4.4. Probability calculation

5.4.5. Conclusion
5.5. Correlation
5.5.1. Linear relationship – CPA
5.5.2. Equivalence
5.5.3. Conclusion
5.6. A priori knowledge synthesis
5.7. Conclusion on statistical tools
5.8. Exercise solutions
5.9. Notes and further references
5.10. References
Chapter 6. Quantities to Judge Side Channel Resilience
Elisabeth OSWALD
6.1. Introduction
6.1.1. Assumptions and attack categories
6.1.2. Attack success
6.2. Metrics for comparing the effectiveness of specific attack
vectors
6.2.1. Magnitude of scores
6.2.2. Number of needed leakage traces/success rate estimation
6.3. Metrics for evaluating the leakage (somewhat) independent of
a specific attack vector
6.3.1. Signal to noise ratio
6.3.2. Mutual information
6.4. Metrics for evaluating the remaining effort of an adversary
6.4.1. Key rank
6.4.2. Average key rank measures
6.4.3. Relationship with enumeration capabilities

6.5. Leakage detection as a radical alternative to attack driven
evaluations
6.6. Formal evaluation schemes
6.6.1. CC evaluations
6.6.2. FIPS 140-3
6.6.3. Worst-case adversaries
6.7. References
Chapter 7. Countermeasures and Advanced Attacks
Brice COLOMBIER and Vincent GROSSO
7.1. Introduction
7.2. Misalignment of traces
7.2.1. Countermeasures
7.2.2. Attacks
7.3. Masking
7.3.1. Countermeasures
7.3.2. Attacks
7.4. Combination of countermeasures
7.5. To go further
7.6. References
Chapter 8. Mode-Level Side-Channel Countermeasures
Olivier PEREIRA, Thomas PETERS and François-Xavier
STANDAERT
8.1. Introduction
8.2. Building blocks
8.3. Security definitions
8.3.1. Authenticated encryption and leakage
8.3.2. Integrity with leakage

8.3.3. Confidentiality with leakage
8.3.4. Discussion
8.4. Leakage models
8.4.1. Models for integrity
8.4.2. Models for confidentiality
8.4.3. Practical guidelines
8.5. Constructions
8.5.1. A leakage-resilient MAC
8.5.2. A leakage-resistant encryption scheme
8.5.3. A leakage-resistant AE scheme
8.6. Acknowledgments
8.7. Notes and further references
8.8. References
Part 3. Fault Injection Attacks
Chapter 9. An Introduction to Fault Injection Attacks
Jean-Max DUTERTRE and Jessy CLEDIERE
9.1. Fault injection attacks, disturbance of electronic components
9.1.1. History of integrated circuit disturbance
9.1.2. Fault injection mechanisms
9.1.3. Fault injection benches
9.1.4. Fault models and fault injection simulation
9.2. Practical examples of fault injection attacks
9.2.1. Introduction
9.2.2. 1997 light attack on a secure product when loading a
DES key
9.2.3. Experimental examples of an attack on a PIN
identification routine

9.3. Notes and further references
9.4. References
Chapter 10. Fault Attacks on Symmetric Cryptography
Debdeep MUKHOPADHYAY and Sayandeep SAHA
10.1. Introduction
10.2. Differential fault analysis
10.2.1. Block ciphers and fault models
10.2.2. DFA on AES: single-byte fault
10.2.3. DFA on AES: multiple-byte fault
10.2.4. DFA on AES: other rounds
10.2.5. DFA on AES: key schedule
10.2.6. DFA on other ciphers: general idea
10.3. Automation of DFA
10.3.1. ExpFault
10.4. DFA countermeasures: general idea and taxonomy
10.4.1. Detection countermeasures
10.4.2. Infective countermeasures
10.4.3. Instruction-level countermeasures
10.5. Advanced FA
10.5.1. Biased fault model
10.5.2. Statistical fault attack
10.5.3. Statistical ineffective fault attack
10.5.4. Fault template attacks
10.5.5. Persistent fault attacks
10.6. Leakage assessment in fault attacks
10.7. Chapter summary

10.8. Notes and further references
10.9. References
Chapter 11. Fault Attacks on Public-key Cryptographic
Algorithms
Michael TUNSTALL and Guillaume BARBU
11.1. Introduction
11.2. Preliminaries
11.2.1. RSA
11.2.2. Elliptic curve cryptography
11.3. Attacking the RSA using the Chinese remainder theorem
11.4. Attacking a modular exponentiation
11.5. Attacking the ECDSA
11.6. Other attack strategies
11.6.1. Safe errors
11.6.2. Statistical ineffective fault attacks
11.6.3. Lattice-based fault attacks
11.7. Countermeasures
11.7.1. Padding schemes
11.7.2. Verification, detection and infection
11.7.3. Attacks on countermeasures
11.8. Conclusion
11.9. Notes and further references
11.10. References
Chapter 12. Fault Countermeasures
Patrick SCHAUMONT and Richa SINGH
12.1. Anatomy of a fault attack
12.2. Understanding the attacker

12.2.1. Fault attacker objectives
12.2.2. Fault attacker means
12.3. Taxonomy of fault countermeasures
12.4. Fault countermeasure principles
12.4.1. Redundancy
12.4.2. Randomness
12.4.3. Detectors
12.4.4. Safe-error defense
12.5. Fault countermeasure examples
12.5.1. Algorithm level countermeasures
12.6. ISA level countermeasures
12.7. RTL-level countermeasures
12.8. Circuit-level countermeasures
12.9. Design automation of fault countermeasures
12.10. Notes and further references
12.11. References
OceanofPDF.com

Summary of Volume 3
Preface
Emmanuel PROUFF, Guénaël RENAULT, Matthieu RIVAIN and
Colin O’FLYNN
Part 1. White-Box Cryptography
Chapter 1. Introduction to White-Box Cryptography
Pierre GALISSANT and Louis GOUBIN
1.1. Introductory remarks
1.2. Basic notions for white-box cryptography
1.2.1. Unbreakability
1.2.2. Incompressibility
1.2.3. One-wayness
1.3. Proposed (and broken) solutions
1.3.1. Block ciphers
1.3.2. Asymmetric algorithms
1.4. Generic strategies to build white-box implementations
1.4.1. DCA and countermeasures
1.4.2. Using fully homomorphic encryption (FHE)
1.4.3. White-box solutions with the help of a (small) tamper-
resistant hardware
1.5. Applications of white-box cryptography
1.5.1. EMV payments on NFC-enabled smartphones without
secure element
1.5.2. Software DRM mechanisms for digital contents
1.5.3. Mobile contract signing
1.5.4. Cryptocurrencies and blockchain technologies

1.6. Notes and further references
1.7. References
Chapter 2. Gray-Box Attacks against White-Box Implementations
Aleksei UDOVENKO
2.1. Introduction
2.2. Specifics of white-box side-channels
2.2.1. Determinism
2.2.2. Precise measurements
2.2.3. Data-dependency graph and attack windows
2.2.4. Computational model
2.2.5. Computational traces
2.2.6. Sensitive/predictable functions
2.3. Fault injections
2.3.1. Locating and removing pseudorandomness and dummy
values
2.3.2. Detecting linear shares from output collisions
2.4. Exact matching attack
2.4.1. First-order exact matching attack
2.4.2. Higher order exact matching attack
2.5. Linear decoding analysis/algebraic attacks
2.5.1. Basic algebraic attack
2.5.2. Differential algebraic attack against shuffling
2.6. Countermeasures against the algebraic attack
2.6.1. Security model sketch
2.6.2. Nonlinear masking
2.6.3. Dummy shuffling
2.7. Conclusions

2.8. Notes and further references
2.9. References
Chapter 3. Tools for White-Box Cryptanalysis
Philippe TEUWEN
3.1. Introduction
3.2. Tracing programs
3.3. Target recognition
3.4. Acquiring traces for side-channel analysis
3.5. Preprocessing traces
3.6. Differential computation analysis
3.7. Linear decoding analysis also known as algebraic attack
3.8. Injecting faults
3.9. Differential fault analysis
3.10. Coping with external encodings
3.11. Conclusion
3.12. Notes and further references
3.13. References
Chapter 4. Code Obfuscation
Sebastian SCHRITTWIESER and Stefan KATZENBEISSER
4.1. Introduction
4.1.1. Definition of obfuscation
4.1.2. Goals of obfuscation
4.1.3. Protecting against locating data
4.1.4. Protecting against locating code
4.1.5. Protecting against extraction of code
4.1.6. Protecting against understanding of code
4.1.7. Attacker models

4.1.8. Pattern matching
4.1.9. Automated static analysis
4.1.10. Automated dynamic analysis
4.1.11. Human-assisted analysis
4.2. Obfuscation methods
4.2.1. Data obfuscation
4.2.2. Static obfuscation
4.2.3. Dynamic obfuscation
4.3. Attacks against obfuscation
4.3.1. Principles of program analysis
4.3.2. Measuring the strength of obfuscations
4.4. Application of code obfuscation
4.4.1. Digital rights management
4.4.2. Intellectual property protection
4.4.3. Malware obfuscation
4.4.4. Hardware-software binding
4.4.5. Software diversity
4.5. Conclusions
4.6. Notes and further references
4.7. References
Part 2. Randomness and Key Generation
Chapter 5. True Random Number Generation
Viktor FISCHER, Florent BERNARD and Patrick HADDAD
5.1. Introduction
5.2. TRNG design
5.3. Randomness and sources of randomness

5.3.1. Example: jitter of a clock signal as a source of
randomness
5.3.2. Stochastic model of the phase of the jittered clock signal
5.4. Randomness extraction and digitization
5.4.1. Example: oscillator-based TRNGs
5.5. Post-processing of the raw binary signal
5.5.1. Algorithmic post-processing
5.6. Stochastic modeling and entropy rate management of the
TRNG
5.6.1. Example: a comprehensive stochastic model of the EO-
TRNG
5.6.2. Example: stochastic model of the MO-TRNG
5.7. TRNG testing and testing strategies
5.7.1. Generic (black-box) statistical tests used in cryptography
5.7.2. Online statistical tests
5.7.3. Example: dedicated online tests for the MO-TRNG
5.8. Conclusion
5.9. Notes and further references
5.10. References
Chapter 6. Pseudorandom Number Generation
Jean-René REINHARD and Sylvain RUHAULT
6.1. Introduction
6.2. PRNG with ideal noise source
6.2.1. Standard PRNG
6.2.2. Stateful PRNG
6.2.3. Stateful pseudorandom generator with inputs
6.3. PRNG with imperfect noise sources

6.3.1. Extractors
6.3.2. Robustness model of Coretti et al. (2019)
6.4. Standard PRNG with inputs
6.4.1. General architecture of NIST PRNG with inputs
6.4.2. Security analysis and good practices
6.5. Notes and further references
6.6. References
Chapter 7. Prime Number Generation and RSA Keys
Marc JOYE and Pascal PAILLIER
7.1. Introduction
7.2. Primality testing methods
7.3. Generation of random units
7.4. Generation of random primes
7.4.1. Probable primes
7.4.2. Provable primes
7.5. RSA key generation
7.6. Exercises
7.7. Notes and further references
7.8. References
Chapter 8. Nonce Generation for Discrete Logarithm-Based
Signatures
Akira TAKAHASHI and Mehdi TIBOUCHI
8.1. Introduction
8.2. The hidden number problem and randomness failures
8.2.1. From Schnorr to HNP
8.2.2. From ECDSA to HNP
8.3. Lattice attacks

8.3.1. Lattice basics
8.3.2. Expressing the HNP as a lattice problem
8.3.3. Some recent developments
8.4. Fourier transform attack
8.4.1. Quantifying bias using discrete Fourier transform
8.4.2. Stretching the peak width
8.4.3. Range reduction algorithms
8.5. Preventing randomness failures
8.6. Notes and further references
8.7. Acknowledgment
8.8. References
Chapter 9. Random Error Distributions in Post-Quantum
Schemes
Thomas PREST
9.1. Introduction
9.2. Why post-quantum schemes need random errors
9.2.1. Example 1: noisy ElGamal
9.2.2. Example 2: hash-then-sign
9.2.3. Example 3: Fiat–Shamir with aborts
9.3. Distributions for random errors
9.3.1. Uniform distributions
9.3.2. Fixed weight distributions
9.3.3. Variants of the binomial distribution
9.3.4. Discrete and rounded Gaussians
9.3.5. Randomized rejection sampling
9.4. Sampling algorithms
9.4.1. Table-based algorithms

9.4.2. Random permutations
9.4.3. Convolution-based algorithms
9.4.4. Polynomial approximation
9.4.5. Rejection methods
9.4.6. Masking the various algorithmic approaches
9.5. Notes and further references
9.6. References
Part 3. Real-World Applications
Chapter 10. ROCA and Minerva Vulnerabilities
Jan JANCAR, Petr SVENDA and Marek SYS
10.1. The Return of Coppersmith's Attack
10.1.1. Fingerprinting
10.1.2. Factorization attack
10.1.3. Practical impact and disclosure
10.1.4. Notes and further references
10.2. Minerva
10.2.1. Discovery and leakage
10.2.2. Cause
10.2.3. Attack
10.2.4. Impacted domains and disclosure
10.2.5. Notes and further references
10.3. References
Chapter 11. Security of Automotive Systems
Lennert WOUTERS, Benedikt GIERLICHS and Bart PRENEEL
11.1. Introduction
11.2. The embedded automotive attacker
11.3. An overview of automotive attacks

11.3.1. Proximity vehicle attacks
11.3.2. Remote vehicle attacks
11.3.3. Infrastructure attacks
11.4. Application of physical attacks in automotive security
11.4.1. Side-channel analysis
11.4.2. Fault injection
11.5. Case study: Tesla Model X keyless entry system
11.5.1. The key fob
11.5.2. The body control module
11.5.3. Putting it all together
11.6. Conclusion
11.7. References
Chapter 12. Practical Full Key Recovery on a Google Titan
Security Key
Laurent IMBERT, Victor LOMNE, Camille MUTCHLER and Thomas
ROCHE
12.1. Introduction
12.2. Preliminaries
12.2.1. Product description
12.2.2. Google Titan Security Key Teardown
12.2.3. Matching the Google Titan Security Key with other
NXP products
12.2.4. Side-channel
12.3. Reverse-engineering and vulnerability of the ECDSA
algorithm
12.3.1. Reverse engineering the ECDSA signature algorithm
12.3.2. A sensitive leakage
12.4. A key-recovery attack

12.4.1. Recovering scalar bits from the observed leakage
12.4.2. Lattice-based attack with partial knowledge of the
nonces
12.5. Take-home message
12.6. References
Chapter 13. An Introduction to Intentional Electromagnetic
Interference Exploitation
José LOPES ESTEVES
13.1. IEMI: history and definition
13.2. Information security threats related to electromagnetic
susceptibility
13.3. Electromagnetic fault injection
13.4. Destruction, denial of service
13.5. Denial of service on radio front-ends
13.6. Signal injection in communication interfaces
13.7. Signal injection attacks on sensors and actuators
13.8. IEMI-covert channel
13.8.1. The air gap
13.8.2. Bridging air gaps
13.8.3. Threat model
13.8.4. Practical IEMI-covert channel on a PC
13.9. Electromagnetic watermarking
13.9.1. Threat model
13.9.2. EMW for forensic tracking
13.9.3. Practical EMW on a UAV
13.10. Conclusion
13.11. References

Chapter 14. Attacking IoT Light Bulbs
Colin O’FLYNN and Eyal RONEN
14.1. Introduction
14.2. Preliminaries
14.2.1. ZLL (ZigBee Light Link) and smart light systems
14.2.2. Lamp hardware
14.2.3. Firmware updates
14.2.4. Hue Bridge hardware
14.3. Hardware AES and AES-CTR attacks
14.3.1. Application to ATMega128RFA1
14.3.2. Later-round attacks
14.4. AES-CCM bootloader attack
14.4.1. Understanding Philips OTA image cryptographic
primitives
14.4.2. CPA attack against the CCM CBC MAC verification
14.5. Application of attack
14.6. Notes and further references
14.7. References
OceanofPDF.com

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.
OceanofPDF.com

