
Table of Contents
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Preface
Structure
Resources
Acknowledgements
Part I: Preliminaries
1 Introduction
1.1 What is Digital Forensics?
1.2 File System Forensics
1.3 Digital Forensic Principles
1.4 Digital Forensic Methodology
1.5 About This Book
1.6 Book Structure
1.7 Summary
Bibliography
Notes
2 Linux as a Forensic Platform
2.1 Open‐Source Software
2.2 Open‐Source Software in Digital Forensics
2.3 What is Linux?
2.4 Using Linux
2.5 Linux as a Forensic Platform
2.6 Summary

Bibliography
Notes
3 Mathematical Preliminaries
3.1 Bits and Bytes
3.2 Number Systems
3.3 Representing Text
3.4 Representing Time
3.5 Endianness and Raw Data
3.6 Summary
Bibliography
Notes
4 Disks, Partitions and File Systems
4.1 Disk Storage
4.2 Partitions
4.3 File Systems
4.4 Acquisition of File System Data
4.5 Analysis of File Systems
4.6 Summary
Bibliography
Notes
Part II: Windows File Systems
5 The FAT File System
5.1 On‐Disk Structures
5.2 Analysis of FAT32
5.3 FAT32 Advanced Analysis
5.4 Summary
Bibliography
Notes
6 The ExFAT File System

6.1 On‐Disk Structures
6.2 Analysis of ExFAT
6.3 ExFAT Advanced Analysis
6.4 Summary
Bibliography
Notes
7 The NTFS File System
7.1 On‐Disk Structures
7.2 Analysis of NTFS
7.3 NTFS Advanced Analysis
7.4 Summary
Bibliography
Notes
Part III: Linux File Systems
8 The EXT2 File System
8.1 On‐Disk Structures
8.2 Analysis of ext2
8.3 Ext2 Advanced Analysis
8.4 Summary
Bibliography
Notes
9 The EXT3/EXT4 File Systems
9.1 Supplied Image Files
9.2 The ext3 File System
9.3 The Ext4 File System
9.4 Summary
Bibliography
Notes
10 The XFS File System

10.1 On‐Disk Structures
10.2 Analysis of XFS
10.3 XFS Advanced Analysis
10.4 Summary
Bibliography
Notes
11 The Btrfs File System
11.1 On‐Disk Structures
11.2 Analysis of Btrfs
11.3 Btrfs Advanced Analysis
11.4 Summary
Bibliography
Notes
Part IV: Apple File Systems
12 The HFS+ File System
12.1 On‐Disk Structures
12.2 Analysis of HFS+
12.3 HFS+ Advanced Analysis
12.4 Summary
Bibliography
Notes
13 The APFS File System
13.1 On‐Disk Structures
13.2 Analysis of APFS
13.3 APFS Advanced Analysis
13.4 Summary
Bibliography
Notes
Part V: The Future

14 Future Challenges in Digital Forensics
14.1 Challenges in Digital Forensics
14.2 Where Do We Go from Here?
14.3 Summary
Bibliography
Notes
Index
End User License Agreement
List of Tables
Chapter 1
Table 1.1 Competing digital forensic methodologies. Similar
phases are groupe...
Chapter 2
Table 2.1 A selection of the file systems supported in the Linux
kernel. Note...
Table 2.2 Distro popularity based on Distro Watch page views
(April 2024).
Chapter 3
Table 3.1 Group names for binary digits.
Table 3.2 Number of values for each of the common powers of
two!
Table 3.3 Decimal/binary prefixes and values.
Table 3.4 Binary/hexadecimal conversion table.
Table 3.5 Converting a fixed‐point binary number to decimal.
Table 3.6 Calculating the value of the 12‐bit floating‐point binary
number
 ....
Table 3.7 ASCII table.

Table 3.8 ISO‐8859 variants.
Table 3.9 Interpretation of 0xE1 in all ISO‐8859 variants.
Table 3.10 UTF‐8 structure.
Table 3.11 Common epoch‐based time formats.
Table 3.12 Structure of the MBR partition table entry.
Chapter 4
Table 4.1 MBR partition table entry structure.
Table 4.2 MBR partition table entry structure for Listing 4.7.
Table 4.3 Selection of values for the file system type in the MBR
partitionin...
Table 4.4 GPT header structure.
Table 4.5 GPT partition entry structure.
Table 4.6 A selection of commonly encountered partition‐type
GUID values.
Table 4.7 General attribute values in GPT.
Table 4.8 Attribute values specific to the Microsoft Basic Data
Partition.
Table 4.9 Comparison of the most common file systems.
Table 4.10 Timestamp availability in the common file systems.
Chapter 5
Table 5.1 Common FAT VBR structure.
Table 5.2 Extended FAT VBR structure (FAT32).
Table 5.3 The FSINFO structure.
Table 5.4 FAT generic directory entry structure.
Table 5.5 FAT flag values.
Table 5.6 FAT LFN directory entry structure.
Table 5.7 Supplied image files available from the book's website.

Table 5.8 Partially processed VBR from FAT32_V1.E01.
Table 5.9 Processed generic root directory entries in
FAT32_V1.E01.
Chapter 6
Table 6.1 The structure of the exFAT main boot sector (sector 0).
Table 6.2 ExFAT directory entry types.
Table 6.3 The primary directory entry generic structure.
Table 6.4 The secondary directory entry generic structure.
Table 6.5 The allocation bitmap directory entry structure. The
values are fro...
Table 6.6 The up‐case table directory entry structure. The values
are from Li...
Table 6.7 The volume label directory entry structure. The values
are from Lis...
Table 6.8 The file directory entry structure.
Table 6.9 The volume GUID directory entry structure.
Table 6.10 The stream extension directory entry structure.
Table 6.11 The filename extension directory entry structure.
Table 6.12 Supplied exFAT image files available from the book's
website.
Table 6.13 Processing the main boot sector in ExFAT_V1.E01.
Table 6.14 The file directory entry for info.txt in ExFAT_V1.E01.
Table 6.15 The stream extension directory entry for info.txt in
ExFAT_V1.E01. ...
Chapter 7
Table 7.1 Special files in NTFS.
Table 7.2 NTFS $Boot structure.
Table 7.3 MFT record header structure.

Table 7.4 Attribute header structure.
Table 7.5 Resident attribute header structure.
Table 7.6 Non‐resident attribute header structure.
Table 7.7 The attributes and their lengths from the MFT record in
Listing 7.3...
Table 7.8 The $STANDARD_INFORMATION attribute
structure.
Table 7.9 Flag values for the $STANDARD_INFORMATION
attribute.
Table 7.10 $ATTRIBUTE_LIST structure.
Table 7.11 $FILENAME attribute structure.
Table 7.12 $OBJECT_ID attribute structure. Note that often in
recent Windows ...
Table 7.13 $SECURITY_DESCRIPTOR attribute header
structure.
Table 7.14 The Security ID (SID) structure.
Table 7.15 Access control list (ACL) structure.
Table 7.16 Access control entry (ACE) structure.
Table 7.17 Object specific access mask bits.
Table 7.18 Standard access mask bits.
Table 7.19 The $VOLUME_INFORMATION attribute structure.
The values are from L...
Table 7.20 Flag values for the $VOLUME_INFORMATION
attribute in NTFS.
Table 7.21 $INDEX_ROOT header structure with values from
Listing 7.8.
Table 7.22 $INDEX_ROOT node header structure with values
from Listing 7.8.
Table 7.23 The index record header structure.

Table 7.24 The structure of $REPARSE_POINT attribute.
Table 7.25 The structure of $REPARSE_POINT attribute.
Table 7.26 $EA_INFORMATION attribute structure.
Table 7.27 $EA attribute structure.
Table 7.28 NTFS disk images available from the book's website.
Table 7.29 Processed values from $Boot structure in
NTFS_V1.E01.
Table 7.30 The attributes discovered in the MFT record for $MFT
in NTFS_V1.E01
Table 7.31 Partially processed non‐resident attribute header
structure in the...
Table 7.32 The attributes discovered in the MFT record for the
root directory...
Table 7.33 Partially processed values for the
$INDEX_ALLOCATION attribute in ...
Table 7.34 Processed index record header from Listing 7.18.
Table 7.35 Processed node header from Listing 7.18.
Table 7.36 Processed directory entries from Listing 7.18. Note
that some valu...
Table 7.37 The processed MFT record header for info.txt in
NTFS_V1.E01.
Table 7.38 The processed $STANDARD_INFORMATION
attribute in info.txt in NTFS_V...
Table 7.39 The processed $FILENAME attribute in info.txt in
NTFS_V1.E01.
Table 7.40 Non‐resident attribute header structure.
Table 7.41 Partially processed $AttrDef entry structure with
values from List...

Table 7.42 Processing the alternate data stream in Listing 7.37.
The offsets ...
Table 7.43 Processed attribute entries from Listing 7.42.
Chapter 8
Table 8.1 Comparison of ext file systems with traditional
Windows file system...
Table 8.2 Block groups in ext that contain superblock structures.
Table 8.3 Superblock structure. Note that some values have been
omitted.
Table 8.4 Compatible, incompatible and read‐only compatible
features.
Table 8.5 Block group descriptor structure.
Table 8.6 Ext2 inode structure.
Table 8.7 Interpretation of the most significant nibble in the ext
mode struc...
Table 8.8 Selection of inode flag values in various ext file
systems.
Table 8.9 Disk images available from the book's website.
Table 8.10 Selected superblock values from Ext2_V1.E01.
Table 8.11 Partially processed BG0 descriptor from Listing 8.8.
Table 8.12 Partially processed root directory inode in
Ext2_V1.E01.
Table 8.13 Root directory entry structure.
Table 8.14 Processed root directory entries.
Table 8.15 Possible file type field values in a root directory entry.
Chapter 9
Table 9.1 Ext3/4 disk images available from the book's website.
Table 9.2 Ext3 journal block header structure.

Table 9.3 Ext3 journal superblock version 1 structure.
Table 9.4 Ext3 journal superblock version 2 structure. The first
0x24 bytes a...
Table 9.5 Default journal descriptor block structure.
Table 9.6 Version 3 journal descriptor block structure.
Table 9.7 Processed entries from the Ext3_V1.E01 descriptor
block (block numbe...
Table 9.8 HTree root node structure with interpreted values from
Listing 9.12...
Table 9.9 Ext4 inode structure.
Table 9.10 The extent header structure in ext4.
Table 9.11 The extent leaf node structure in ext4.
Table 9.12 Processed extent tree from Listing 9.18.
Table 9.13 The ext4 extent index structure.
Table 9.14 Processed extents from Listing 9.21.
Table 9.15 Extended attribute structure. The values are from
Listing 9.31.
Table 9.16 Extended attribute header block structure. The values
are from Lis...
Table 9.17 Ext4 block group descriptor entry structure.
Chapter 10
Table 10.1 Structure of the XFS short form B+Tree.
Table 10.2 Structure of the XFS long form B+Tree.
Table 10.3 XFS superblock structure.
Table 10.4 XFS extended superblock structure (version 5).
Table 10.5 Expected superblock locations in an XFS file system
with a block s...

Table 10.6 A selection of signature values used in the XFS file
system.
Table 10.7 XFS inode core structure.
Table 10.8 Directory header structure.
Table 10.9 XFS directory entry structure.
Table 10.10 XFS image files used in this chapter.
Table 10.11 Extracted values from the superblock in
XFS_V1.E01.
Table 10.12 Partially processed root directory inode in
XFS_V1.E01.
Table 10.13 Processed directory entries in the root directory.
Table 10.14 Partially processed AG free block information
structure. The valu...
Table 10.15 Processed short form tree header from the free space
block number...
Table 10.16 Processed entries in Listing 10.11.
Table 10.17 AG Free list header structure with values from
Listing 10.12.
Table 10.18 The inode information area. Values are from Listing
10.13.
Table 10.19 Processed inode B+Tree. from AG0 in XFS_V1.E01.
Values are from Li...
Table 10.20 Inode B+Tree record structure. Processed values are
from the reco...
Table 10.21 Extended attribute structures. Values are from Listing
10.18.
Table 10.22 Processed values from the log record header in
Listing 10.24.
Table 10.23 Journal log operation header structure.

Table 10.24 Processed operation headers from Listing 10.26.
Table 10.25 Processed transaction header from Listing 10.26.
Table 10.26 Transaction types as found in the transaction header
structure.
Table 10.27 Log item magic values.
Table 10.28 Buffer write operation structure. Values are taken
from Listing 1...
Table 10.29 Processed operation headers from Listing 10.27.
Table 10.30 Processed inode update for operation
 .
Table 10.31 Possible values for fields in the inode update
operation.
Chapter 11
Table 11.1 Btrfs file system limitations.
Table 11.2 Btrfs superblock structure.
Table 11.3 Btrfs B‐Tree node header structure.
Table 11.4 Leaf node key pointer structure.
Table 11.5 Internal node key pointer structure.
Table 11.6 Btrfs key structure.
Table 11.7 INODE_ITEM structure.
Table 11.8 INODE_REF structure.
Table 11.9 DIR_ITEM structure.
Table 11.10 EXTENT_DATA header structure.
Table 11.11 Subsequent data in EXTENT_DATA structure for a
regular file.
Table 11.12 ROOT_ITEM structure.
Table 11.13 DEV_ITEM structure.
Table 11.14 CHUNK_ITEM structure.

Table 11.15 Btrfs time structure.
Table 11.16 Sample partial CHUNK_TREE for a single device
file system.
Table 11.17 Summary of provided Btrfs image files.
Table 11.18 Partially processed superblock values for
BtrFS_V1.E01.
Table 11.19 Processed key from first CHUNK_ARRAY item.
Table 11.20 Processed CHUNK_ITEM found in the
CHUNK_ARRAY.
Table 11.21 Processed stripes from the CHUNK_ARRAY's
CHUNK_ITEM.
Table 11.22 Processing of the four item pointers found in the
CHUNK_TREE root...
Table 11.23 Partially processed DEV_ITEM from the
CHUNK_TREE.
Table 11.24 Partially processed CHUNK_ITEMs from the
CHUNK_TREE root node.
Table 11.25 Processed item pointers from the root node in Listing
11.14.
Table 11.26 Items discovered in the FS_TREE root node.
Table 11.27 OIDs and associated items in the FS_TREE.
Table 11.28 Processing of DIR_ITEMs in the FS_TREE root
node.
Table 11.29 Processing of DIR_ITEMs in the FS_TREE
belonging to OID 0x101.
Table 11.30 Partially processed INODE_ITEM for OID 0x105 (
sea.jpg).
Table 11.31 Processed EXTENT_DATA for OID 0x104.
Table 11.32 The extent structure for the EXTENT_DATA item in
OID 0x105.

Table 11.33 Excerpts from the CHUNK_ITEMS in
BtrFS_V2.E01. These excerpts prov...
Table 11.34 btrfs_root_backup structure.
Table 11.35 Logical and physical addresses from the second
backup root struct...
Table 11.36 Values for the first three pointers in the FS_TREE
root node.
Table 11.37 Processed stripes from superblock CHUNK_ARRAY.
Table 11.38 Partially processed DEV_ITEMs from both
superblocks.
Table 11.39 The processed CHUNK_TREE for the RAID 1 file
system.
Table 11.40 Values discovered in the ROOT_BACKREF item for
sub1.
Chapter 12
Table 12.1 HFS+ file system limits.
Table 12.2 HFS+ reserved CNIDs.
Table 12.3 HFS+ fork structure.
Table 12.4 HFS+ extent descriptor structure.
Table 12.5 HFS+ volume header structure.
Table 12.6 HFS+ volume header attribute bit field values.
Table 12.7 HFS+ volume header structure (continued).
Table 12.8 HFS+ B‐Tree node descriptor.
Table 12.9 HFS+ B‐Tree header node structure.
Table 12.10 Catalog file key structure.
Table 12.11 Structure of the folder record data item in the catalog
file.

Table 12.12 Structure of the file record data item in the catalog
file.
Table 12.13 Structure of the thread record data item in the catalog
file.
Table 12.14 HFS+ permission structure.
Table 12.15 Text encoding values.
Table 12.16 Extents overflow key structure.
Table 12.17 HFS+ Journal info block structure.
Table 12.18 The journal header structure.
Table 12.19 Supplied HFS+ disk images.
Table 12.20 Processed volume header in HFS_V1.E01.
Table 12.21 Processed values for the HFS+ catalog file fork in
HFS_V1.E01.
Table 12.22 HFS+ Catalog file header node descriptor.
Table 12.23 HFS+ B‐Tree header record for the catalog file's
header node in HF...
Table 12.24 Catalog file's root node descriptor in HFS_V1.E01.
Table 12.25 Processed keys in the HFS_V1.E01 catalog file's root
node. Offsets...
Table 12.26 Partially processed catalog file record for the
foggy.jpg file.
Table 12.27 Partially processed header record from the catalog
file's header ...
Table 12.28 Keys from the two items in the root node with their
pointer value...
Table 12.29 Processed extents for hills.jpg (CNID: 
 ) in
HFS_V4.E01.
Table 12.30 Partially processed header record from the extents
overflow file'...

Table 12.31 Extents overflow file's key structure.
Table 12.32 Processed extents overflow keys from Listing 12.23.
Table 12.33 Processed extents from the data forks in Listing
12.23.
Chapter 13
Table 13.1 APFS object header structure.
Table 13.2 APFS B‐Tree node header structure.
Table 13.3 B‐Tree info structure.
Table 13.4 ToC entry structure for fixed length key value pairs.
Table 13.5 ToC entry structure when handling variable length
keys and values.
Table 13.6 APFS container superblock structure.
Table 13.7 APFS volume superblock structure.
Table 13.8 The object map structure.
Table 13.9 Structure of the object map B‐Tree values.
Table 13.10 Object‐type codes for file system tree keys.
Table 13.11 APFS inode structure.
Table 13.12 Extended field information structure.
Table 13.13 Extended field data‐type values.
Table 13.14 Extended field data stream structure.
Table 13.15 Directory record structure.
Table 13.16 File extent value structure.
Table 13.17 Checkpoint mapping structure.
Table 13.18 Supplied APFS container images.
Table 13.19 Partially processed container superblock from
APFS_V1.dd.

Table 13.20 Partially processed container object from Listing
13.3.
Table 13.21 Partially processed object and node headers of the
object map B‐T...
Table 13.22 Partially processed B‐Tree information area from
Listing 13.5.
Table 13.23 Partially processed VSB from Listing 13.8.
Table 13.24 Partially processed object and node headers from
Listing 13.9.
Table 13.25 Processed ToC entries from Listing 13.10.
Table 13.26 Processed inode from Listing 13.15.
Table 13.27 Processed data stream extended attribute from Listing
13.16.
Table 13.28 The XID values in each of the container superblocks
located in th...
Table 13.29 Contents of the volume object map located in block
0xC00 in APFS_V...
Table 13.30 Interpreted key/value pairs from Listing 13.25. Note
that keys ha...
Table 13.31 The structure of the sibling link record with values
from Listing...
Chapter 14
Table 14.1 Identified current and future challenges in file system
forensics ...
List of Illustrations
Chapter 2
Figure 2.1 Interactions between the various layers in the Linux
OS.

Figure 2.2 Logical view of Linux memory.
Figure 2.3 The Linux Mint desktop immediately after login.
Figure 2.4 The Linux Mint Menu showing the various application
categories.
Figure 2.5 The Linux Mint terminal application.
Chapter 3
Figure 3.1 FAT date bit field structure.
Figure 3.2 FAT time bit field structure.
Figure 3.3 Raw binary data displayed using the xxd command.
Figure 3.4 Raw hexadecimal data displayed using the xxd
command.
Figure 3.5 The in‐built calculator showing the conversion of a
decimal numbe...
Chapter 4
Figure 4.1 A traditional HDD with the cover removed showing
the internal str...
Figure 4.2 Platter structure showing the tracks, sectors and
clusters.
Figure 4.3 A disk with five partitions created using a primary
MBR and an ex...
Figure 4.4 GPT‐partitioned device structure.
Figure 4.5 Demonstrating slack space. (A) A file that occupies
three cluster...
Figure 4.6 A sample B‐Tree structure.
Figure 4.7 Media handling preferences in nemo file explorer
when automount i...
Figure 4.8 The guymager application showing two connected
disks.
Chapter 5

Figure 5.1 The layout of the FAT file system.
Figure 5.2 The FAT date bit field structure.
Figure 5.3 The FAT time bit field structure.
Figure 5.4 The recovered CLIFFS.JPG file.
Chapter 6
Figure 6.1 The layout of the exFAT file system.
Figure 6.2 An example allocation bitmap (0xEF36) showing the
binary values o...
Chapter 7
Figure 7.1 A sample B‐Tree structure showing the three nodes
that are examin...
Figure 7.2 A sample B‐Tree structure with filenames as values.
Similar to th...
Figure 7.3 An original NTFS metadata structure (top) and the
same metadata s...
Figure 7.4 MFT record structure.
Figure 7.5 A sample run list. The first byte describes the structure
which i...
Figure 7.6 The Access Mask bit field structure.
Figure 7.7 The relevant bitmap values for hills.jpg before file
deletion.
Chapter 8
Figure 8.1 General layout of an ext volume.
Figure 8.2 Internal block group structure.
Figure 8.3 Block pointer structure.
Figure 8.4 BG0 structure in Ext2_V1.E01.
Figure 8.5 The extracted lake.jpg file.
Chapter 9

Figure 9.1 Ext journal structure.
Figure 9.2 HTree structure.
Figure 9.3 Flexible block group structure.
Figure 9.4 Incompatible features value 0x82C2 from Listing 9.36
showing the ...
Chapter 10
Figure 10.1 Allocation group structure.
Figure 10.2 Absolute address structure in XFS where
 is 
 .
Figure 10.3 Absolute inode address structure in XFS where
 is 
 and 
 is 
 ....
Figure 10.4 XFS inode structure.
Figure 10.5 XFS extent structure.
Figure 10.6 Contents of the recovered file sunrise.jpg.
Figure 10.7 The recovered tree.jpg file.
Chapter 11
Figure 11.1 Btrfs B‐Tree leaf node structure.
Figure 11.2 Btrfs B‐Tree internal node structure.
Figure 11.3 The recovered sea.jpg file.
Chapter 12
Figure 12.1 Structural overview of a HFS+ B‐Tree.
Figure 12.2 The recovered foggy.jpg file.
Figure 12.3 A HFS+ Catalog node before deletion (left) and after
deletion (r...
Chapter 13
Figure 13.1 APFS container structure.
Figure 13.2 APFS B‐Tree structure.

Figure 13.3 APFS B‐Tree (root) node structure. ToC is the node's
table of co...
Figure 13.4 Extended field structure.
Figure 13.5 APFS container structure showing the checkpoint
descriptor and d...
Figure 13.6 The recovered Headland.jpg file.
OceanofPDF.com

File System Forensics
Fergus Toolan
Norwegian Police University College
Ballina, Tipperary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OceanofPDF.com

Copyright © 2025 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data
mining and training of artificial technologies or similar technologies.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise,
except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either
the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate
per‐copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
(978) 750‐8400, fax (978) 750‐4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher
for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111
River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748‐6011, fax (201) 748‐6008, or online at
http://www.wiley.com/go/permission.
The manufacturer's authorized representative according to the EU General Product Safety Regulation
is Wiley‐VCH GmbH, Boschstr. 12, 69469 Weinheim, Germany, e‐mail: Product_Safety@wiley.com.
Trademarks: Wiley and the Wiley logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries and may not be used without
written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Further, readers
should be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when
this work was written and when it is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable for any
loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact
our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762‐2974, outside the United States
at (317) 572‐3993 or fax (317) 572‐4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print
may not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web
site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging‐in‐Publication Applied for:
Hardback ISBN: 9781394289790
Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Image: © aleksandarvelasevic/Getty Images
OceanofPDF.com

To Helen
Thanks for everything!
OceanofPDF.com

Preface
The prevalence of digital evidence in modern investigation has led to the
need for more skilled analysts who can interpret digital evidence in a
meaningful manner. Much digital evidence is stored in a file system and the
correct recovery of this information is crucial to investigation. While there
exist many tools that automate the recovery of data from file systems, there
is a need for greater understanding of what these tools do. This allows the
expert to verify the findings of file system forensic tools leading to greater
trust in the recovered evidence.
The target audience of this title is anyone with an interest in digital
investigation, who wishes to know how evidence is recovered from file
systems. This includes University students taking modules or even entire
programmes in the digital forensics and cybersecurity domains and law
enforcement agents (or other investigators) who are tasked with recovering
information from file systems and explaining its relevance. For both
audiences the aim of this book is to provide an in‐depth understanding of
how information is recovered from common file systems.
Structure
This book is organised in five distinct parts. Part I provides the
preliminaries that all digital forensic experts require. Parts II–IV provide the
technical meat of the title. These parts focus on the common file systems for
each of the most popular operating systems (Windows, Linux and macOS).
Part V discusses the future of file system forensics and what new (and some
old) challenges are ahead for the discipline.
Part I, Preliminaries, begins with an introduction to digital forensics in
general and discusses some of the principles that govern the area. This
chapter also introduces the reader to digital forensic methodologies and
how they are used to streamline investigation. Chapter 2 describes the
Linux operating system and how it can be used for file system forensics.
Throughout the remainder of the text the examples will be given using the
Linux command line, but there is no requirement for readers to follow this.

Chapter 2 provides an introduction to Linux for those that wish to use it
going forward. For those who do not intend to use (or already use) it, this
chapter can be skipped. Chapter 3 discusses the topic of information
representation. Computers are capable of processing and storing only binary
data (ones and zeros). How these ones and zeros are interpreted as
meaningful information is of vital importance. This chapter shows how
numbers, text and time are represented in computing systems and how we
interpret the raw hex data that we will encounter during file system
forensics. The final chapter in this part introduces the reader to disk storage,
partitions and file systems. This chapter describes the common partitioning
schemes in use today and shows how they can be located. It then introduces
the file system and shows the various concepts that exist within this
organisational structure. The chapter finishes with an introduction to disk
acquisition – how we acquire the file systems that we will later process – 
and the analysis of these file systems.
Part II introduces the Windows family of file systems, although more
accurately this might be called the Microsoft family. This includes FAT
(Chapter 5), ExFAT (Chapter 6) and NTFS (Chapter 7). For many years
FAT file system variants were the standard for removable media. While this
is changing as ExFAT becomes dominant a large volume of devices with the
FAT file system are still found during investigation. This, coupled with the
relative simplicity of the FAT file system, means that it is an ideal choice
for the first file system to be studied in this book. Subsequently the ExFAT
file system is introduced. While some consider this to be another variant of
the FAT file system, it is sufficiently more advanced to be deserving of its
own chapter. This is the most common file system found on removable
media today. Both FAT and ExFAT are supported by all major operating
systems and, as such, can be found in many cases. The final Windows file
system in this text is that of NTFS. The New Technology File System is the
default on all Windows systems and as such is very commonly encountered
in digital investigation.
Part III introduces the Linux file systems. This begins with the ext family of
filesystems (Chapters 8 and 9). Many might wonder how important these
chapters are as Linux is rarely encountered in digital investigation.
However, these are some of the most important file systems in use today.
The ext family are one of the default file systems found in Android phones,

and as such, one of the most commonly encountered file systems in
investigation. Knowledge of these file systems is of vital importance to all
file system forensic investigators. File systems of the ext family are
commonly encountered in many IoT devices. So while true to say that they
are not commonly encountered in the home computer area, they are very
important file systems for the analyst. This part of the book also introduces
two less common Linux file systems: XFS (Chapter 10) and BtrFS (Chapter
11). These file systems are encountered in some Linux distributions, and are
also found in large scale storage applications such as data centres. As device
storage capacity increases these file systems will become more common in
the home market.
Part IV examines the Apple file systems. For many years Apple devices
utilised the HFS+ file system (Chapter 12). Since late 2017 Apple devices
have begun to use the APFS file system (Chapter 13). This is a modern file
system which can scale to modern device sizes in an efficient manner. Due
to the popularlity of Apple devices (phones, tablets, computers etc.) this file
system is encountered very frequently in modern digital investigation. The
final part of this book looks to the future and in particular examines the
challenges that will face the community over the next number of years.
Each file system chapter (Chapters 5–13) is organised in a similar manner.
Initially a description of the general layout and the actual structures present
in the file system is provided for each file system. This is followed by a
manual analysis in which the reader can see all steps required to recover file
content and metadata. Finally each chapter finishes with advanced topics
for each file system. This always includes topics such as deleted and
fragmented files along with topics specific to each file system.
Resources
Throughout this book example file systems are used to demonstrate the
manual analysis and more advanced topics. Each file system generally has
between three to five different image files that are used. All of this data is
available to the user through the book's supporting website. This data can be
found at: https://www.fsforensics.com/book.
Please email any corrections to me at fergus@fsforensics.com.

Ireland, June 2024
Fergus Toolan
OceanofPDF.com

Acknowledgements
When I began this project I never realised how difficult it would be to
complete. It would never have been completed without the support of many
people. To everyone who had any part in this thank you all very much!
There are some who must be mentioned directly!
Firstly those that proof read the document itself. Thank you! To my
technical proof readers Ray Genoe, Alan Browne, Ivar Friheim and Ulf
Bergum who between them checked the code listings and exercises in the
book. Many thanks for that! My father Dónal read every single word of the
manuscript and offered countless corrections and suggestions for
improvement.
Many thanks to the editorial team at John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Victoria
Bradshaw, Vishal Paduchuru, and Aileen Storry for all of your help
throughout the publication process.
Over the years I have been very fortunate to work with some amazing
people in the area of digital forensics. In my current role I am part of an
amazing team of academics and law enforcement officers. Thanks to
Carlota, Georgina, Nina, Rune, Sara and Ulf. Also past colleagues including
Ray, Cormac, Gerry, Kurt‐Helge, Yves, Jørn Helge and Alexander. I thank
the wonderful heads of the investigation section in the Norwegian Police
University College: Ivar, John Ståle, Dag and Inger. All of you gave me the
freedom to explore the topics that I was most interested in.
This book started as a resource for my students. I thank all of you that I
taught over the years. Much of the information presented in this book is
based on the challenging questions that you have asked me. Hopefully this
book will answer some of them!
During my own formative years I had some wonderful teachers in
University College Dublin. Special mention to Joe Carthy, John Dunnion,
Nick Kushmerick and Henry McLoughlin. I would not have had the ability
or the confidence to attempt this project without your inspirational teaching
over the years.

This project would never have been completed without the constant belief
and support of my family. Thanks to my parents, Dónal and Anna, who
always encouraged me to pursue my dreams and supported me throughout.
Finally when I thought about giving up on this project, it was my partner
Helen who encouraged me to keep going. She always believed that I could
do this even on the days when I didn't believe that myself. Thank you!
Fergus Toolan
OceanofPDF.com

Part I
Preliminaries
OceanofPDF.com

1
Introduction
In recent years the volume of digital evidence in criminal investigations has
increased dramatically. Consider the situation at the turn of the century
when the standard computer was the desktop computer a device that resided
on, as the name suggests, the desk. The majority of crime scenes did not
involve a computer. When computers were involved they were generally
relevant only in specific case types such as hacking/cybercrime; child abuse
material; and fraud. Returning to the present, there is digital evidence in
almost every case!1 The majority of people carry smartphones on their
person at all times. Cars contain navigation, entertainment and camera
systems. Homes and businesses have digital CCTV systems that run
continuously. People communicate through social media. The end result for
investigators2 is that there has been a vast increase in the quantity of digital
evidence encountered during investigation.
Almost all data in electronic storage media is held in files. A file is an
object on a computing device that stores data, information, settings or
applications. Every document, picture, spreadsheet, database, etc. on a
computer system is composed of one or more files. Every computer system
therefore needs a method of managing files. This is generally achieved
through the use of a file system. File systems exist on every electronic
storage device and provide a method of locating the actual file's content and
also provide information about the file itself. An ability to access these files
is of vital importance during investigation.
Investigators have many tools at their disposal which allow them to access
this information. However, these tools suffer certain limitations including:
Unsupported File Systems: There are many different file systems in
existence. File system forensic tools generally support only the most
common file systems, those that are found on the most common
operating systems. However, there are many more that are sometimes
encountered during an investigation. These might be impossible to
process without knowledge of how file systems function.

Undisclosed Methods: Most file system forensic tools are closed
source3 meaning users are unable to see exactly what actions are being
performed. A knowledge of file system structures will allow the
investigator to show how data is stored in a file system and therefore
show possible means of recovering said data. It also supports
verification of the results of closed‐source tools.
Cost: The majority of these tools are commercial tools with associated
cost implications for users. Knowledge of how file systems function
could ultimately allow an investigator to create their own tools.
Hence it is necessary that investigators understand the structures that are
utilised by file systems. This not only allows the investigator to analyse file
systems which are not supported by the current tool but also allows them to
explain possible means by which these tools work. Digital forensic analysts
are often considered ‘experts’ in their field. Knowledge of file systems and
their underlying structures will allow these analysts to more validly claim
this title and stand over the evidence generated by file system forensic tools.
1.1 What is Digital Forensics?
In recent years the term digital forensics has become more familiar to all,
especially anyone involved in investigation. Digital evidence is seen in TV
shows on a regular basis. Numerous jobs are available in many areas which
require skills in digital forensics, from e‐discovery to incident response and
cybersecurity. But what is digital forensics? That's a difficult question to
answer!
There is no single accepted definition of digital forensics. In this section a
number of definitions are presented and the common elements identified.
This process will eventually culminate in the definition that is used
throughout this book.
Interpol defines digital forensics as:
… a branch of forensic science that focuses on identifying, acquiring,
processing, analysing, and reporting on data stored electronically.
Interpol (n.d.)

Lang et al define digital forensics as:
… the science of identifying, collecting, preserving, documenting,
examining, analyzing and presenting evidence from computers,
networks, and other electronic devices.
Lang et al. (2014)
Techopedia defines digital forensics as:
… the process of uncovering and interpreting electronic data. The goal
of the process is to preserve any evidence in its most original form while
performing a structured investigation by collecting, identifying and
validating the digital information for the purpose of reconstructing past
events.
Techopedia (n.d.)
These, and the many other definitions that can be found, all share some
common traits. For instance all of them mention electronic devices/data. All
evidence in digital forensics is generated from electronic traces. These
traces may be found on storage media, in network traffic, online, etc. Hence
digital forensics is forensic analysis performed on electronically
stored/transmitted information. Additionally both Lang et al. (2014) and
Interpol mention science. Digital forensics is a branch of forensic science
and as such should be based on scientific principles.
All of the above definitions attempt to define the process that is followed.
Many definitions use similar wording to describe these processes. For
instance words such as identifying, collecting (or acquiring), preserving,
presenting (or reporting) or analysing (or interpreting) are used in the
majority of definitions.
Hence, for the purposes of this book the following definition will be
adopted.
Digital forensics is the application of scientific principles to the
identification, preservation, collection, analysis and presentation of
evidence obtained from electronic media.

1.2 File System Forensics
File system forensics is a particular branch of digital forensics in which the
electronic medium in question is the actual storage device (i.e. the disk).
File systems are structures which organise information on disk. The file
system is the structure that allows saved information to be retrieved at a
later date. When a file is saved, not only is the content saved but
information about the content (metadata) is also saved. This metadata
provides much necessary information about the file content such as
timestamps and file size, but also provides information on how to locate the
content on disk.
Techopedia defines a file system as:
… a process that manages how and where data on a storage disk,
typically a hard disk drive (HDD), is stored, accessed and managed. It is
a logical disk component that manages a disk's internal operations as it
relates to a computer and is abstract to a human user.
Techopedia (n.d.)
File system forensics therefore involves the application of the scientific
method to identify, preserve, collect, analyse and present evidence
recovered from a file system. In order to be able to perform these tasks the
analyst (whether human or software) must fully understand the structures
on which the file system in question is based. Different file systems result in
very different structures and hence different analysis methods.
For instance compare two commonly encountered file systems in digital
forensics: The File Allocation Table (FAT) and the new Apple File System
(APFS). FAT is an old file system and in comparison to modern file systems
such as APFS it is very simple. Generally older file systems allow for the
storage/retrieval of information from them and very little else. FAT contains
three structures that are of interest to forensic examiners (the volume boot
record, the file allocation table and directory entries) meaning that only a
small amount of knowledge is required to analyse this file system
effectively. Now compare this to APFS. APFS is a modern file system. It
provides much more functionality than an older system such as FAT. This
includes encryption, snapshots, compression, etc. The underlying structures

are inherently more complex meaning that this file system is much more
difficult to examine effectively.
1.3 Digital Forensic Principles
The United Kingdom's Association of Chief Police Officers4 (ACPO)
drafted the Good Practice Guide for Digital Evidence. Version 5 (released in
2012) is the latest version of this document. This document contains a set of
four principles for the effective handling of digital evidence.
These ACPO principles, as they are often called, are based on the UK legal
system and the rules of evidence in that system. However, the principles are
almost universal and have been adopted in many countries over recent
years. These principles are:
Principle 1: No action taken by law enforcement agencies, persons
employed within these agencies or their agents should change data
which may subsequently be relied upon in court.
Principle 2: In circumstances where a person finds it necessary to
access original data, that person must be competent to do so and be
able to give evidence explaining the relevance and the implications of
their actions.
Principle 3: An audit trail or other record of all processes applied to
digital evidence should be created and preserved. An independent third
party should be able to examine those processes and achieve the same
result.
Principle 4: The person in charge of the investigation has overall
responsibility for ensuring that the law and these principles are
adhered to.
These principles were originally drafted in the early days of digital
evidence. At that stage most digital evidence resided on computer storage
devices. The standard method was to power off the device, create an image
and analyse that image. As the area of digital forensics has developed over
the years this standard method of operation has also developed. Now it is no
longer always advised to switch off the computer. Instead it is sometimes

recommended to analyse running machines. Not all information is now
stored locally, some will be stored remotely, even the crime scene itself may
be remote. However, while some argue that the principles need to be
updated, they are still fit for purpose.
The overall aim of these principles is to ensure that all digital evidence
accessed during a criminal investigation is handled in such a manner that it
can be used in court. Hence the first principle states that no changes should
be made to the original data. The second principle ensures that only trained
personnel will ever access original data and the third principle ensures that
others will be able to recreate and validate the analysis of the evidential
material. For traditional computer forensics these three principles are
sufficient.
Now consider a modern scenario. First responders arrive at the home of a
suspected cybercriminal. They use a warrant to enter the premises and seize
all electronic evidence that is encountered. Upon entering the premises they
discover a running computer. The traditional advice was to ‘pull‐the‐plug’;
however, with modern computers this might lose evidence. Most modern
operating systems allow options for encrypted storage. If power is removed
the data on the device will become inaccessible due to its encryption.
Additionally many users use remote storage resources for files, emails,
profiles, etc. Connections to these sites (and potentially access to the data
they contain) will be lost if the power is removed. Hence live data forensics
(LDF) is conducted, in which the running computer is analysed to
determine if there is anything of evidential value present.
Returning to ACPO Principle 1 which states ‘no action taken by law
enforcement agencies … should change data which may subsequently be
relied upon in court’. LDF immediately breaks this principle. Every action
performed on a running computer system will leave traces in memory and
on disk. Even the simple act of moving the mouse will have consequences,
as it will change certain parts of the computer system. This has led to some
researchers suggesting that the ACPO principles should be rewritten.
However, they are still fit for purpose as while LDF breaks principle 1,
combining this with principles 2 (competence) and 3 (audit trail), the
altered data collected from the LDF process can still be used in a court
setting.

1.4 Digital Forensic Methodology
From the early days of digital forensics it has long been recognised that
there is no standard methodology for obtaining results. As, in an ideal
world, digital forensics is ‘based on scientific principles’ it is necessary that
there should be one agreed‐upon methodology.
Table 1.1 summarises the phases in a number of competing methodologies
for digital forensics. These include O'Ciarduin's Extended Model of
Cybercrime Investigation, the Digital Forensics Research Workshop Model,
Reith Carr and Gunsch's model and the Nordic Computer Forensic
Investigators model.5 Table 1.1 presents each of these methodologies
grouped to show similar phases.

Table 1.1 Competing digital forensic methodologies. Similar phases are
grouped.
DFRWS
Reith, Carr,
Gunsch
O'Ciarduin
NCFI
Identification
Awareness
Initiation
Preparation
Authorisation
Strategy
Development
Authorisation
Planning
Notification
Identification
Search
Localisation
Preservation Preservation
Preservation
Collection
Collection
Collection
Acquisition
Transport
Storage
Examination Examination
Examination
Processing
Analysis
Analysis
Hypothesis
Analysis
Hypothesis
Presentation
Hypothesis Proof
Presentation Presentation
Dissemination
Reporting
Decision
QA/Evaluation
Evidence Return
Combining the methodologies shown in Table 1.1 leads to the methodology
that will be used throughout this book. This consists of eight phases:
Preparation; Localisation/Preservation; Acquisition; Processing; Analysis;
Reporting; Quality Assurance and Evidence Return. The following sections
describe these phases of the proposed digital forensics methodology.

1.4.1 Preparation
The preparation phase consists of a number of tasks that must be completed
in order for the digital forensic process to succeed. O'Ciarduin's extended
model of cybercrime investigation subdivides this phase into four distinct
phases. Common tasks in the preparation phase include:
Crime Identification: Part of preparation involves identifying that a
crime/incident has taken place and determining what laws have been
broken. This will determine some of the hypotheses that will be
developed in subsequent phases.
Authorisation: Ensuring that the relevant parties have the correct
authorisation to investigate/prosecute the crime in question. In certain
jurisdictions the suspect must also be notified that the investigation is
to take place.
Planning: The investigation is planned at this stage. Necessary
warrants must be obtained and initial roles are allocated to the
investigative team.
Resource Allocation: It is necessary to ensure that all relevant
resources (hardware, software, personnel, etc.) are in place prior to
commencing the investigation.
Training: All members of the investigative team must have received
all necessary training/education. This is directly related to the ACPO
principles which require all agents handling original material to be
competent to do so.
1.4.2 Localisation/Preservation
The purpose of this phase is to locate sources of potential digital evidence
and to preserve these in such a way that they are not altered (or are altered
as little as possible) so that they can be relied upon in court.
Traditionally this phase took place at a physical crime scene, for instance a
house search. The first response team attempt to locate all sources of digital
evidence at the scene. This might include traditional devices such as
computers, tablets, smartphones and USB keys. It also includes less
common items such as smart appliances, networking technology, vehicles

and drones. In modern digital investigation the focus is shifting from the
physical to the virtual. Hence localisation is also concerned with finding
relevant online sources (open‐source intelligence – OSINT – gathering), log
files and external sources of digital evidence such as CCTV and access
logs.
Once sources of potential evidence are located the next part of this phase is
to preserve them. Traditionally this involved pulling the plug and then
bagging and tagging the physical device. With the advent of LDF this phase
sometimes involves preserving a running computer by preventing it from
locking or, if battery powered, from dying. With the modern networked age
another vital step at this stage is to prevent remote access to the device as a
person could remotely delete evidence from the device. In the online
environment preservation is often more complex. Generally the potential
evidence will not be present at the crime scene indeed it may exist in a
different jurisdiction to that of the investigator. Preservation of these online
items might be achieved through court orders. Preservation of external
records such as call data records (CDR) can also be achieved through a
court order.
1.4.3 Acquisition
Acquisition is the process where a forensically sound copy of the potential
evidence is created. Once this step is completed there should never be a
need to return to the original source. All of the subsequent stages should be
performed on the copy. With electronic storage media this stage involves
the creation of an image, an exact bit by bit copy, of a storage device. This
means not only will the live files on the device be copied, but also deleted
files, slack space, unallocated space, etc. These concepts will be explained
in Chapter 4.
For online resources this phase involves the acquisition of a copy of the
web resource. This can be done through a browser (using the save
functionality) or by taking screenshots or videos of the site. In certain cases,
acquisition can be performed by the site administrator and the resulting
evidence files delivered to the investigator.

1.4.4 Processing
Processing involves getting the acquired evidence file ready for analysis by
investigators. This is the phase in which file system forensic analysis
resides. With a traditional electronic storage device processing involves
extracting all live and deleted files from the image along with the
unallocated space and slack space from the device. Processing involves
carving in unallocated space to recover files which are no longer part of a
file system (Section 4.5.2). This stage also involves processing certain
artefacts that have been recovered. This might include rebuilding browser
history, extracting individual chat messages from a database, expanding
archive files and so forth. In the online environment processing involves the
extraction of relevant components of the online artefact such as contacts,
images, email addresses and comments.
The information generated by processing is passed to the analyst to
determine if the information is relevant to the investigation and if that
evidence supports or refutes the investigative hypotheses.
1.4.5 Analysis
The analysis phase of the digital forensic methodology requires knowledge
of the actual case being investigated. In this stage investigative hypotheses
are generated and the analyst uses the evidence provided by the processing
phase to prove or disprove these hypotheses. This phase is very much
dependent on the case in question.
1.4.6 Reporting
The dissemination of results is one of the most important stages in any
investigation. This phase covers a multitude of reporting types. The most
iconic is that of the final report which is submitted to the court. This
document shows all the evidence that has been discovered throughout the
investigation, the relevance of this evidence to the hypotheses under
investigation and the methods used to recover the evidence.
However, this phase is much more than a mere final report. Many digital
forensic methodologies are described in a linear fashion, implying that one
phase follows another. This is not strictly speaking correct, no more so than
in the case of reporting. Firstly it is not common to find only a single final

report. Generally there will be reports made at the end of most phases of the
methodology. For instance a report will be written in relation to
localisation/preservation (the report about the crime scene search). Another
report will be written about the acquisition process and another relating to
processing. All of these intermediate reports will be used to help create the
final report.
The dissemination of results involves more than written reports. There are
other forms of dissemination of information that are vital to the correct
application of the digital forensic methodology. One example of this is the
use of contemporaneous notes. It is recommended that all actors in the
digital forensic process maintain their own personal notes about the case
and the tasks that are performed during the case. This can act as another aid
to the creation of a final report but can also be used as an audit trail (ACPO
3) allowing third parties to recreate the actions of investigators.
A final part of this phase is that of internal presentation of results. The
digital forensic process may involve multiple actors (first responders,
analysts, investigators, etc.). It is necessary during the process to ensure that
all parties are conversant with the actions that have been taken by other
parties in the handling of digital evidence in the case. This type of reporting
is often achieved through briefings throughout the investigation.
The final task in some instances is the presentation of evidence in court.
Generally this presentation will be based on the final report and will be
directed by the prosecution while subject to cross‐examination by the
defence.
1.4.7 Quality Assurance
Many commentators have said that the digital forensic process is prone to
error and therefore quality must be assured throughout the process. On a
case‐by‐case basis this can be achieved using methods such as peer review
in which an independent party validates the result of a forensic process.
This is directly related to the ACPO principles which require that this
recreation of results be possible (ACPO 3). There are different levels of
peer review as proposed by Horsman and Sunde (2020), from very simple
administrative checks all the way through to complete reexamination of the
device(s).

While in an ideal world all cases would be subject to complete
reexamination, generally the resources are not present to do this. Instead
only certain cases are selected for complete examination. A complete
reexamination might be required when:
The investigator encounters a new case type or one of which they have
limited knowledge of the case or data type;
novel techniques are to be employed in the case/analysis;
the prosecution's case revolves largely around digital evidence;
the crime type is of a serious nature and may lead to severe sentencing;
or
the case is more complex than normal (i.e. more exhibits than usual).
Cases that meet the above criteria should be fully reexamined along with a
sample of randomly chosen cases.
1.4.8 Evidence Return
Certain methodologies also include an evidence return phase, in which
evidence is returned to the suspect/victim. This phase is more complex than
it might at first appear as not all evidence can be returned. For instance
child sexual abuse material is illegal and cannot be returned to the suspect.
The devices/evidence must be evaluated and decisions made on what
should legally be returned to the victim/suspect and what should be
retained/destroyed.
1.5 About This Book
This book began as a series of notes created for classes given by the author
throughout his career. The author has been teaching digital forensics (with a
special interest in file system forensics) for over 15 years. Over that time
the author has taught/analysed many different file systems. This book is a
result of this work over the years.
This book is also written to pay homage to one of the greatest books in
digital forensics, Brian Carrier's File System Forensic Analysis. This book

was the author's introduction to the area of file system forensics and in the
author's opinion is one of the best books on digital forensics available to
this day. However, it has been many years since the publication of this
book. File systems have developed in the intervening years. For instance
Carrier only considered Ext 2 and 3, Ext 4 had not been released at the time
of that book's publication. However, Ext 4 is now the default on the
overwhelming majority of Linux installations and is also encountered on all
Android devices. Hence it is a vital file system to understand. Carrier's book
did not cover any Apple file systems; however, Apple devices are a large
and growing part of the file system forensic analyst's workload. Older
devices will use the HFS+ file systems while newer devices use APFS.
Even in the world of the traditional Windows file systems times are
changing. Since the publication of Carrier's book there have been two new
Windows file systems, ExFAT and Refs. All of these reasons have led to a
need for a new resource.
The aim of this book is to provide the reader with knowledge of how file
systems function and, more importantly, how digital forensic tools function.
Many digital forensic analysts rely upon their chosen file system forensic
tool(s) to gather evidence that they require for court, without ever
understanding what processes are being performed by that tool. This opens
these analysts to challenges. In today's increasingly technical world, with
the explosion in digital forensic/cybersecurity positions these challenges are
more likely to occur. In order to stand over the evidence produced by a file
system forensic tool the analyst should fully understand the workings of the
file system and the workings of the tool used to recover the evidence.
1.5.1 Who Should Read This Book?
There are two audiences for this book, both based on the author's working
experience. The author has long taught at University level in the area of
digital forensics. During this time the author has taught most of the file
systems in this book, so this book is written for students. The book will suit
both undergraduate and graduate‐level students of digital forensics.
An undergraduate course might focus on the preliminary part of this book
and the manual analysis of one or two of the windows file systems (ExFAT
and NTFS would be the author's recommendation). An advanced graduate‐
level course would focus on more file systems and include the advanced

topics related to each file system. Some graduate courses may specialise in
Windows/Apple/Linux system forensics. In these cases the file systems
used by each OS will be important to the course. Hence each of Parts II, III
and IV is independent of each other. It is assumed that the reader will
understand the preliminaries but the parts stand on their own to be used as
an instructor sees fit.
The second audience for this book is law enforcement or more correctly any
digital forensic analyst who is required to testify in courts. Too often
analysts rely on the tool to interpret complex structures without fully
understanding the underlying structure. There is a potential risk in this
approach. If evidence is challenged an inability to explain what the forensic
tools are doing might count against the evidence provided. Hence this
audience can use this book as a resource to understand how file systems
function and how our forensic tools might work on particular file systems.6
Additionally knowledge of file systems at this level will leave the analyst in
a position to verify the results of their forensic tools. Do these tools perform
as expected? Do they recover all of the information that is present? Do they
recover the information correctly? Answers to these questions are of vital
importance to ensure correctness of digital evidence and everyone's right to
a fair trial.

1.6 Book Structure
This book is divided into five parts. The first part is entitled Preliminaries
and is just that! It reviews the basic material that is required for file system
forensics. One of the topics covered in this section is the use of Linux as an
investigative platform. Linux is an open‐source operating system which
provides great support for many file systems by default (more than
Windows/macOS). This makes it an ideal forensic workstation. Chapter 2
provides information about the installation and usage of the Linux OS.
Those of you that use Linux regularly may skip this section (although if you
don't use Linux for file system forensics there might be some useful
information in Section 2.5).
In order to fully understand a file system it is necessary that we understand
how information is represented in a computer system. Remember that only
ones and zeros can be stored on a disk. It is therefore necessary to
understand how a sequence of ones and zeros may represent all forms of
information (numbers, text, time, etc.). The mathematical preliminaries
necessary for this book are introduced in Chapter 3. File Systems are
generally found on disks, Chapter 4 describes the traditional hard drive
structure and also newer solid‐state drives. This chapter will describe
partitioning and introduce the most commonly encountered partitioning
schemes. Finally the chapter introduces the file system. What is a file
system? What does it do? In doing this many concepts important to file
system forensics will be introduced. These concepts will help the reader
gain a fuller understanding of what their tools are doing.
The following parts introduce various file systems. These parts are divided
into the major operating systems. For instance Part II introduces the file
systems that are most often encountered on Windows systems, FAT7
(Chapter 5), ExFAT (Chapter 6) and NTFS (Chapter 7).
Part III introduces the Linux file systems which, while not as commonly
encountered as Windows/Mac file systems, are found more frequently in
server‐level machines. However, at the other end of the scale, the Linux OS
is also regularly found on small‐scale devices (Android is a form of Linux)
and even on embedded devices. Linux file systems are often found

accompanying the Linux OS, so a knowledge of these file systems is often
important. The Linux file systems are not generally as well supported by the
digital forensic tools as the Windows/macOS file systems. This part of the
book covers the Ext family of file systems (Chapters 8 and 9), the XFS file
system (Chapter 10) and finally the modern BtrFS file system (Chapter 11).
Part IV introduces the Apple file systems. There are two that are most likely
to be encountered in modern macOS systems. Systems, both phone and
computer, prior to 2017 were shipped with the Hierarchical File System,
HFS+, while newer systems use the Apple File System (APFS). These two
file systems are covered in Part 4 (Chapters 12 and 13).
Finally Part V (Chapter 14) looks to the future. What challenges will be
faced in the area of file system forensics in the years to come? Also, more
importantly, it covers possible methods to overcome these potential
challenges!
1.7 Summary
This chapter introduced the concept of digital forensics and its importance
in modern investigation. In recent years the volume of digital evidence has
increased dramatically leading to a need for more digital forensic analysts
to handle the ever‐growing volume of information. Consider a family home.
In the 1990s this would have contained one or two computers and some
external storage media (floppy disks; CD's; etc.). Now this same home will
contain multiple computers/laptops; tablets; smartphones; games consoles;
smart TVs; etc. The sheer volume of devices has increased over the years
leading to a need for more skilled people in this area.
In order to commence working in this area the analyst must be conversant
with the principles and methodologies that underpin the discipline. This
chapter proceeded to introduce the ACPO principles which have formed the
bedrock of digital forensic analysis over a number of years. All analysts
should keep these principles in mind when handling digital evidence.
Correctly adhering to these principles provides a much greater chance of
digital evidence being accepted in the court.
Methodology adds structure to our activities. Methodologies ensure that
vital steps are not forgotten. This chapter compares a number of

methodologies proposed over the years and shows how similar all of these
are to each other. The chapter then describes an eight‐step methodology
which contains all the various steps in the other methodologies. However,
the key point is that all methodologies are very similar. Which methodology
is used is not important, what is important is that a methodology is followed
throughout the analysis.
The remainder of the preliminary section of this book will introduce the
reader firstly to the Linux operating system and specifically its use as a
forensic workstation. This is followed by the mathematical fundamentals
necessary for digital forensics and an introduction to disk/file system
storage.
Exercises
The following list suggests a number of topics which may be used in essay‐
style questions or as classroom discussion topics.
1. The necessity for digital forensics in criminal investigation has grown
in recent years. What effects might this have on the quality of digital
forensics?
2. Compare and contrast any two digital forensic methodologies
(DFRWS, Reith, Carr and Gunsch, O'Ciarduin and NCFI are
mentioned in this chapter). Are there any abstract differences between
them?
3. Consider situations where it is recommended to run a full
reexamination in the quality assurance phase of the digital forensic
methodology. Do you consider this list to be sufficient? Should
more/less situations be included?
4. Are the ACPO principles still fit‐for‐purpose?
Bibliography
ACPO (2011). ACPO Good Practice Guide for Digital Evidence [Internet].
[cited 2024 February 20].
https://npcc.police.uk/documents/crime/2014/Revised%20Good%20Prac

tice%20Guide%20for%20Digital%20Evidence:Vers%205_Oct%202011
_Website.pdf (accessed 12 August 2024).
Baryamureeba, V. and Tushabe, F. (2004). The Enhanced Digital
Investigation Process Model. Digital Investigation.
Brighi, R. and Ferrazzano, M. (2021). Digital forensics: best practices and
perspective. Collezione Di Giustizia Penale 7: 13–48.
Carrier, B. (2005). File System Forensic Analysis. Boston, MA;
London:Addison‐Wesley.
Ferguson, R.I., Renaud, K., Wilford, S., and Irons, A. (2020). PRECEPT: a
framework for ethical digital forensics investigations. Journal of
Intellectual Capital 21 (2): 257–290.
Gogolin, G. (2021). Digital Forensics Explained. CRC Press.
Guide, N.I. (2001). A Guide for First Responders, 4. National Institute of
Justice.
Horsman, G. (2020). ACPO principles for digital evidence: time for an
update? Forensic Science International: Reports 2: 100076.
Horsman, G. (2022). Defining principles for preserving privacy in digital
forensic examinations. Forensic Science International: Digital
Investigation 40: 301350.
Horsman, G. and Sunde, N. (2020). Part 1: The need for peer review in
digital forensics. Forensic Science International: Digital Investigation
35: 301062.
INTERPOL (2022). Digital Forensics [Internet]. INTERPOL [cited 2024
February 20]. https://www.interpol.int/en/How-we-
work/Innovation/Digital-forensics (accessed 12 August 2024).
Jones, A. and Vidalis, S. (2019). Rethinking digital forensics. Annals of
Emerging Technologies in Computing (AETiC), Print ISSN: 2516–0281.
Lang, A., Bashir, M., Campbell, R., and DeStefano, L. (2014). Developing
a new digital forensics curriculum. Digital Investigation 11: S76–S84.

Marshall, A.M. (2010). Quality standards and regulation: challenges for
digital forensics. Measurement and Control 43 (8): 243–247.
Nance, K., Hay, B., and Bishop, M. (2009). Digital forensics: defining a
research agenda. In: 2009 42nd Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences (5 January 2009), 1–6. IEEE.
National Police Chief's Council (2020). Digital Forensic Science Strategy
[Internet]. [cited 2024 April 3].
https://www.npcc.police.uk/SysSiteAssets/media/downloads/publication
s/publications-log/2020/national-digital-forensic-science-strategy.pdf
(accessed 12 August 2024).
Ó'Ciardhuáin, S. (2004). An extended model of cybercrime investigations.
International Journal of Digital Evidence 3 (1): 1–22.
Pollitt, M. (2010). A history of digital forensics. In: Advances in Digital
Forensics VI: Sixth IFIP WG 11.9 International Conference on Digital
Forensics, Hong Kong, China (4–6 January 2010), Revised Selected
Papers 6 2010, 3–15. Berlin, Heidelberg:Springer‐Verlag.
Reith, M., Carr, C., and Gunsch, G. (2002). An examination of digital
forensic models. International Journal of Digital Evidence 1 (3): 1–2.
Saleem, S., Popov, O., and Bagilli, I. (2014). Extended abstract digital
forensics model with preservation and protection as umbrella principles.
Procedia Computer Science 35: 812–821.
Sharevski, F. (2015). Rules of professional responsibility in digital
forensics: a comparative analysis. Journal of Digital Forensics, Security,
and Law 10 (2): 3.
Stoykova, R. (2021). The presumption of innocence as a source for
universal rules on digital evidence –the guiding principle for digital
forensics in producing digital evidence for criminal investigations.
Computer Law Review International 22 (3): 74–82.
Sunde, N. and Horsman, G. (2021). Part 2: The Phase‐oriented Advice and
Review Structure (PARS) for digital forensic investigations. Forensic
Science International: Digital Investigation 36: 301074.

Techopedia (2019). What is a File System? ‐ Definition from Techopedia
[Internet]. Techopedia.com. [cited 2024 April 23].
https://www.techopedia.com/definition/5510/file-system (accessed 12
August 2024).
Yeboah‐Ofori, A. and Brown, A.D. (2020). Digital forensics investigation
jurisprudence: issues of admissibility of digital evidence. Journal of
Forensic, Legal & Investigative Sciences 6 (1): 1–8.
Notes
1 The UK's National Police Chief's Council estimate that over 90% of
crimes involved a digital element in 2020.
2 Investigator is used throughout this book to signify any party involved in
criminal or corporate investigations.
3 One exception to this is the Sleuth Kit which will be used throughout this
book to validate results when possible.
4 This organisation was dissolved in 2015 and replaced by the National
Police Chief's Council (NPCC).
5 The Nordic Computer Forensic Investigators (NCFI) methodology is used
in the author's institution.
6 The author does not claim that the tools work in an identical manner to
those shown in the book, merely that it is a method which these tools
might use!
7 While FAT (and ExFAT) are more commonly associated with removable
media than any particular operating system, the original FAT
specification was created by Microsoft and as such it is included in the
Windows file systems section.
OceanofPDF.com

2
Linux as a Forensic Platform
This chapter examines the Linux operating system and discusses the
concepts inherent in open‐source software and the importance of this
software in digital investigation. Why concentrate on Linux as a forensic
platform? Why not use MS Windows for that? The reason is simple. The
Linux platform supports many file systems by default, with the possibility
to add others easily. This is not the case with MS Windows or macOS.
This chapter begins with an introduction to open‐source software and
discusses the advantages/disadvantages of using this during investigation. It
then introduces the Linux operating system and provides a brief overview
of its history and usage. The chapter then proceeds to discuss the use of
Linux as a digital forensics platform, in particular a platform for analysing
file systems. In order to follow the exercises in this book the reader should
be proficient in the use of the Linux operating system. Hence the remainder
of this chapter will describe the Linux installation process and also some of
the standard tools that are available in Linux that might aid the digital
forensic process.
2.1 Open‐Source Software
One of the first things that everyone learns about the Linux operating
system is that it is an example of open‐source software. But what does this
mean? In order to truly understand the benefits of Linux it is necessary to
understand the concepts inherent in open‐source software. This section
describes the open‐source movement and the general advantages of using
this type of software. It then examines the specific case of digital forensics
and evaluates the utility of open‐source software in this arena. However,
before beginning that discussion it is necessary to determine ‘what software
is’?
Software is a collection of commands that tell a computer what to do!
Software is generally written in a programming language of which there are

many.1 Programming languages are a particular type of language that allow
communication with a computer system. Notable programming languages
include C, C++, Java and Python to name a few.
The source code for a piece of software is the actual program written in the
programming language, in other words the exact set of instructions that the
software is passing to the computer. Listing 2.1 shows example source code
in the C programming language. This source code is for one of the simplest
programs that can be written, Hello World.2
While non‐programmers may struggle to understand the code in Listing 2.1
for a programmer it is (in this example) a trivial task to understand exactly
what actions the code will perform. However, the computer does not
directly understand the code shown in Listing 2.1. Instead the code is
translated to a lower level (often called machine code) which the computer
is able to understand. This translation process is known as compiling.
Compiling results in an executable file (a .exe in the Windows
environment). This file cannot be opened in a text editor as it is a binary
file. Instead only the raw data contained in this file can be scrutinised.
Listing 2.2 shows an excerpt from the raw data resulting from the
compilation of the code in Listing 2.1.
I think that everyone will agree that the compiled executable file is much
more difficult for anyone to understand.3 Now consider the scenario in
which I wish to share my wonderful Hello World program with the world.

There are two available options as to how I might do this. Firstly I can do
what many commercial companies do, I can give them the executable file.
People will be able to use my software but they will never be able to alter it
(or even to read the actual code that I wrote). This is known as closed‐
source software: while the software is distributed the source code remains a
secret. The second option is that I provide people with the actual C program
file shown in Listing 2.1. Users of my software have to do a little more
work – they have to compile the program themselves – however, they will
also know exactly what that program is doing, as they can read the program
code, if needed they can even alter the program code. This approach is
known as open‐source code. The actual programming language code is
available to the user.
The open‐source movement defines open‐source software as ‘software with
source code that anyone can inspect, modify and enhance’.4 It is often
provided under a copyleft licence. Traditionally the purpose of copyright is
to protect the author. It enforces the author's rights to the material in
question. Copyleft, on the other hand, requires that the rights associated
with the material are maintained even if the material is reused. If open‐
source software was released without a licence, anyone could use this
software and convert it to proprietary software. Hence the copyleft licence
protects the software, people can still use (and alter) the software but the
resulting copies must continue to use the same licence agreement. In order
to copyleft a piece of software it is first copyrighted and then distribution
terms are added which give everyone the right to use, modify and distribute
the software, or any software derived from it, as long as the distribution
terms are unchanged.
Open‐source software is used in countless areas in computing. Indeed
without being aware of it, you use open‐source software on a daily basis.
For instance both the Google Chrome and Microsoft Edge browsers are
based on the Chromium project – a free, open‐source minimalist web
browser developed by Chrome – while Mozilla Firefox is a purely open‐
source browser. Remaining in the web sphere over 65% of web servers are
powered by the Nginx or Apache Web Servers5 both of which are open‐
source products. Hence at least two‐thirds of web sites are powered by
open‐source technology! When writing documents you may have used the
Apache OpenOffice or LibreOffice suites, both of which are open‐source

projects. The ClamAV project provides an open‐source anti‐virus program.
OpenSSH and PuTTY are two open‐source projects that provide for secure
shell (SSH) remote access. There are also developer websites solely focused
on the development and distribution of open‐source software such as
Source Forge and Github.
2.1.1 Advantages of Open‐Source Software
There are a number of reasons why many people find open‐source
preferable to closed‐source software. The following list provides a non‐
exhaustive number of reasons to use open‐source over closed‐source
software.
Transparency: The user can see what they are getting! This means
they can determine exactly what code is doing (if they possess the
skills) something that is impossible to achieve with closed‐source
code. Development of the application over time is evident either based
on the availability of past versions or on comments included in the
source code. This transparency allows for a better informed decision‐
making process when selecting an open rather than closed‐source
solution.
Community: One of the largest selling points of open‐source software
is the large community of users, developers and testers that exist for
most popular open‐source software solutions. These communities are
the driving force that lead to the introduction of new features in a
faster and more effective way than small teams working on closed‐
source proprietary software are able to achieve. The community will
often also resolve issues quicker than the dedicated team due to the
size of the community and the interest and enthusiasm of the members.
Training: Studying open‐source code can be a great method of
learning to program. It is also a great way for students of programming
to gather feedback on their coding efforts. In the digital forensic
domain studying open‐source code leads to a better understanding of
the underlying structures of various artefacts.
Security: Many argue that open‐source software is by its very nature
less secure than closed‐source software. The argument is that the

hacker can read the source code and discover vulnerabilities. The
open‐source community take the alternative approach: software is
more secure when the code is available to everyone as anyone with an
interest can read the code and fix any security issues that might exist.
This position is supported by the numbers of commercial companies
moving towards open‐source solutions.
Reliability: Due to the large community of developers/testers/users
etc. code tends to be more reliable when released as an open‐source
project rather than a closed‐source one.
Stability: As access to the source code is provided the user can take
over in the unlikely event that the community ceases development.
This is not the same with commercial closed‐source software.
Notice that one reason that is not referred to in this section is cost. Many
consider open‐source software to be free, but while often true, it is not
always the case. This will be discussed in more detail in Section 2.1.2.
2.1.2 Open Source 
 Free
One of the most common arguments made in favour of open‐source
software is that it is free. However, this argument is not always correct.
Richard Stallman, the founder of the Free Software Foundation, intended
code to be free, not necessarily in terms of cost, but in terms of our ability
to do whatever we wished with code. He famously stated that free referred
to ‘free as in free speech, not free as in free beer’. The distinction is that
with ‘free’ software users are at liberty to change anything they wish, but it
does not imply there should be no cost for the software. On saying that,
open‐source software is often free of cost also. This is due to the copyleft
licensing requirements that are enforced upon it. It is very difficult to sell
open‐source software as the licence says that anyone can distribute it.
Hence if one person bought it they could provide it to anyone else free of
charge.
Corporate entities can, and do, make money from the provision of open‐
source software. These entities provide source code free of charge to
anyone who wishes to use it. As with all open‐source projects anyone can
access and modify the source code itself in order to tailor the system for

their exact demands. While the source code is free of charge the company
earns money by providing training courses, customisation, installation and
hosting services, etc. So while the software is open‐source and free, these
corporate entities are still on a sound financial footing!
2.2 Open‐Source Software in Digital
Forensics
The methods employed in digital investigation must be beyond reproach.
Errors in investigation can lead to miscarriages of justice in which the
wrong person may be punished for a crime, or punished more severely than
they deserve. These miscarriages of justice must be avoided at all costs. The
transparency provided by open‐source software provides a level of
confidence in the results of the digital investigation tasks that are not
present when we utilise closed‐source software.
With closed‐source software users rely on trust that the developers of the
software performed their tasks correctly. While most people tend to trust
these commercial software packages many people have encountered errors
in them. Consider the infamous blue screen of death in the Windows
operating system. This error was so commonplace that it even earned its
own acronym, BSoD!
With an open‐source solution it is no longer necessary to trust a small group
of developers, instead trust is placed in the community. This provides more
confidence in the correctness of open‐source tools as the community can
review (and fix) them at any point. Indeed if the end user has the skills to do
so, they can review open‐source software before utilising it in cases. This
leads to increased trust in the software tools that are being used.
Additionally in investigation, and particularly in the court proceedings
which may follow investigation, the notion of disclosure is of vital
importance. Disclosure is the ‘process of revealing evidence held by one
party to an action or a prosecution to the other party’.6 It is the process by
which each party ‘puts their cards on the table’.7 While in the majority of
jurisdictions disclosure refers to documents and testimony, i.e. the evidence
that will be presented, it can also be interpreted to mean the methods by
which the evidence was obtained. Where this is the case, the use of open‐

source software aids the disclosure process. By using open‐source tools the
investigator can stand over the evidence they present in court as anyone can
check that the tools, and hence the evidence, are correct.
On a related note digital evidence is often considered scientific or technical
evidence. Members of the courts are not expected to be experts in this area
and as such guidelines are used to determine if technical or scientific
evidence should be admitted to the court proceedings. In the United States
these rules have been codified, initially as the Frye Standard which is
gradually being replaced by the Daubert Standard. These ‘tests’ are used to
determine the validity of scientific/technical evidence. In both cases these
standards refer to the ‘general acceptance of the technique’ by the relevant
scientific community. Software is the implementation of that technique; it is
therefore not only vital that the technique can be checked, but that the
implementation can also be checked. While techniques may be published
and subject to review, it is only open‐source implementations that are
subject to any form of review. With a closed‐source approach it is never
entirely certain as to what the software actually does.
In summary, while maybe not (yet) essential for digital investigation and
the presentation of technical evidence in court I would argue that the use of
open‐source software tools will greatly improve the reliability and
transparency of evidence presented in court. Doing this ensures that less
errors are made in the investigation process.
2.3 What is Linux?
Opensource.com defines Linux as ‘the best‐known and most‐used open
source operating system’. Many years ago people predicted that Linux
would overtake Windows in the desktop OS market. Now, while we might
see the beginning of the predicted revolution, it has certainly not been at the
expense of Windows as a desktop OS. Even with the success of the Linux
distribution, Ubuntu, Linux has not affected the Windows market share.
However, its success is seen in other areas such as embedded systems; GPS
systems; Android phone OS; and web servers; … etc.
One of the main reasons for using Linux is that it is open source. As stated
previously it is possibly the most used open‐source software available.

However, there are a number of other reasons that its use should be more
common in digital forensics/investigation:
File System Support: Linux provides in‐built support for a large
number of file systems. File system forensics is a large part of digital
forensics and as such this fact is very beneficial.
Servers Use Linux/Unix: The majority of servers use Linux/Unix.
Therefore familiarity with these operating systems can be of benefit in
terms of cybercrime investigation.
Linux Tools Are Less Abstract: Linux command line tools often
force us to work at a lower level than with graphical tools. This
provides a better understanding of what all tools (including more
abstract graphical tools) are actually doing. This knowledge can be
vital if questioned in court!
Full OS: Linux is a full operating system. There is nothing that can be
done in Windows/Mac that can't be done on Linux. You can perform
your investigation, write your report, answer your email, etc. all on the
same machine.
Linux Is Free: Cost is not a driving force behind the selection of
Linux in this book; however, this might be important to managers. All
of the digital forensic tools mentioned in this book are also free.
2.3.1 The Anatomy of the Linux OS
There are a multitude of different Linux versions, many of which are
specialised for particular tasks. Linux can be used as a full operating system
for desktop and server‐level computers, or can be used as a minimal install
for IoT and embedded devices. However, each Linux distribution,
regardless of how different the end result is, shares a similar anatomy. There
are four main parts to Linux systems, which are:
Kernel: The core of Linux providing hardware and software control.
GNU Utilities: Standard utility programs to perform standard
functions such as controlling files.

Graphical Desktop Environment: The GUI for Linux (unlike other
operating systems there is great choice of GUI with Linux).
Application Software: These are the applications that are found on
the system. These include browsers; office software; forensic tools;
etc. This is the software that end users are most familiar with.
The smallest of distributions might only have a kernel (and probably some
specialised applications), while a desktop distribution will have all four
levels. Figure 2.1 shows how these various parts fit together.
Figure 2.1 Interactions between the various layers in the Linux OS.
The kernel is responsible for controlling all hardware and software on the
computer system. While Linus Torvalds is regarded as the creator of Linux,
strictly speaking it is the kernel that he created (with help from others
nowadays). The Linux kernel is responsible for four main functions which
are:

Memory Management: Computer memory consists of two types,
physical and virtual memory. Computers have a limited amount of
physical memory but can use hard drive space to (seemingly) increase
this value. This ‘extra’ memory is called virtual memory. The kernel is
responsible for the management of both physical and virtual memory.
It attempts to ensure that the required information is in the physical
memory before it is actually needed. This is done through a system
called paging in which pages of memory are swapped between virtual
and physical memory. The Linux OS considers the entire virtual
memory space to be available as RAM however, in reality it is only the
physical space that is actually available. Figure 2.2 provides a logical
view of the Linux memory system.
Figure 2.2 Logical view of Linux memory.
Software (Process) Management: The kernel is also responsible for
the management of all software on the running Linux machine. Strictly
speaking this means the management of all of the processes that are

executing on the machine, ensuring that they get the resources that
they require and that they do not interfere with other processes on the
system. Traditionally the very first process started on a Linux system is
initd which has a process ID of 1. In modern Linux systems this is
more likely to be called systemd (but it still has PID 1!). All
subsequent processes on the system will be children of this
initialisation process.
Hardware Management: Hardware devices are also managed by the
kernel. This management involves loading the correct driver code for a
particular device. The driver acts as a translator between the operating
system and the device itself. Historically drivers could only be
compiled into the kernel, meaning that when new hardware was
released the entire kernel had to be updated (and then recompiled) to
support the device. However, with the advent of kernel modules it is
no longer necessary to recompile; instead the kernel merely loads the
new module supplied by the hardware manufacturer (or the Linux
community). This notion of kernel modules removed one of the
biggest obstacles to adopting Linux as the main OS, the difficulty in
configuring new hardware for Linux. Even though one of the selling
points of Linux was that it could run on almost all hardware it was
sometimes difficult to get it working.
You might have heard the expression that ‘everything is a file in
Linux’. This includes devices themselves. Each device is accessed as
if it were a file. Devices are categorised as being character, block or
network devices. The categorisation is based on how communication
occurs. Character devices transmit data one character at a time. These
include modems, keyboards, mice, etc. Block devices handle chunks
of data in one go. These chunks are often called blocks. These devices
include disk drives, CD Rom, RAM, etc. Block devices generally
allow faster access to data than character devices do. Network devices
use packets to send and receive data. Listing 2.3 shows an example of
character and block devices found in the /dev directory on a Linux
Mint system. Note that sdaX refers to disk partitions and ttyX refers
to terminals.

From Listing 2.3 the first character in the permission string is c
(character device) or b (block device). Additionally there is a pair of
numbers underlined for each device (8, 0 for /dev/sda). This pair of
numbers allows the kernel to identify the device. Generally the major
number (8) will be used by all devices of this type, while the minor
number (0) represents a specific device of that type. In this case all
disk drives/partitions will have a major number of 8 (as seen in
Listing 2.3).
File System Management: The final major duty of the kernel is file
system management. As with hardware, file system support can be
compiled into the kernel or can be achieved through external modules.
One of the main reasons to consider using Linux for digital forensics is
the vast number of file systems that are supported out‐of‐the‐box by
Linux systems. Consider the Windows OS, it can support the FAT
family of file systems, along with ExFAT and NTFS. Some of the
Windows Server versions will also support ReFS by default. Table 2.1
shows the list of file systems that are commonly supported by Linux.
Support for others can be added as required.

Table 2.1 A selection of the file systems supported in the Linux kernel.
Note that not all are enabled in every distribution.
File
System
Description
ext
The original Linux extended file system (early 1990s). This
FS is no longer frequently encountered.
ext2
The second extended file system, providing some advanced
features above and beyond ext. This was created in the
early 1990s and is still used today!
ext3
The third extended file system which added support for a
journal structure.
ext4
The fourth extended file system (and the default on most
modern Linux systems).
hpfs
OS/2 high‐performance file system.
jfs
IBM's journaled file system.
iso9660
ISO 9660 file system (CD‐Rom).
minix
The MINIX file system (used with the MINIX operating
system).
msdos
FAT 16.
ncp
Novell netware file system.
nfs
The network file system.
ntfs
Microsoft's new technology file system.
Reiser
FS
An advanced Linux file system for better recovery and
performance.
smb
The samba network sharing file system (compatible with
Windows file sharing).
sysv
An old Unix file system.
ufs
BSD Unix file system.
umsdos
Unix‐like file system as an overlay to msdos.
vfat
FAT 32.
exFat
The extended FAT file system.

File
System
Description
xfs
A high‐performance 64‐bit journaled file system.
While the benefits to digital forensics of being able to access
numerous file systems are obvious, it is also the case that the in‐built
support provides the analyst with much flexibility in how case files
are stored. For instance a modern file system with full RAID support,
such as BtrFS, can be used to store the case information for added
redundancy and resilience.
The next layer in the Linux operating system are the GNU utilities. Utilities
are programs which sit above the kernel and allow the user (and system) to
control files and programs. The original kernel, created by Linus Torvalds,
was merely a kernel. It handled all of the management, but there were no
utilities to run on the kernel. In other words we couldn't do anything with
the OS. However, the GNU (GNU not Unix) organisation was
independently developing a set of Unix‐like utility programs. The GNU
utilities were developed using an open‐source model (championed by
Richard Stallman), and as such could be easily used with the Linux kernel.
The combination of the Linux kernel and the GNU utilities led to a
functioning operating system.
Aside: It's all in the name!
Strictly speaking Linux refers only to the kernel. However, when we say
Linux we generally mean GNU/Linux, which is the combination of the
Linux kernel and the GNU utilities. You can read a little more on the
naming controversy at
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU/Linux_naming_controversy.
Generally when the term Linux is used it refers to GNU/Linux!
The Linux coreutils package is available for all flavours of Linux and
contains many of the utility programs. Listing 2.4 shows an excerpt from
the output of apt‐cache show coreutils, showing that this package is
installed and also showing the standard commands that are included here.

Shells are also considered part of the GNU utilities. A shell is merely a
command line interface (CLI). It is a program which waits for the user (or
another program) to input a command and then executes the command. The
default shell on many modern Linux systems is Bash, but there are many
others available. Most have similar features (e.g. command history, auto‐
completion, selection statements and iterative statements.) but there are
differences between them. Bash is a replacement for the standard Unix
Shell and is a play on words standing for the Bourne Again Shell (the
original Unix shell was often called the Bourne shell after its creator!). Bash
is compatible with the Unix shell but has more features. Other common
shells include:
ash: A lightweight shell that is compatible with Bash, but can run in
low‐resource environments.
korn: korn is a programming shell compatible with Bash but
providing support for more advanced programming constructs than
Bash (e.g. associative arrays and floating point arithmetic).
tcsh: A shell that provides elements of the C programming language.
zsh: An advanced shell combining elements from Bash, korn and tcsh.
Throughout this book commands will be executed in the Bash shell.
The third major component of a Linux system is the graphical desktop
environment. This is the first component that is not required. Many small

devices (IoT for instance) do not use a graphical component as it is not
necessary and only wastes resources. For similar reasons many servers do
not use graphical desktop environments either, preferring to save as many
resources for serving client requests rather than running computationally
expensive graphical processes. On those Linux systems that have graphical
desktop environments, they are actually composed of two subsystems: The
X Window System and the graphical desktop environment.
The X Windows System is responsible for communication with the video
card and monitor on a computer system. The name is derived from the most
popular X Windows System produced by X.org. There are now multiple
packages that implement this behaviour including Wayland (Fedora) and
Mir (Ubuntu). When Linux is installed the X Windows System will query
your display hardware and determine what devices are connected.
Configuration files for these devices will be automatically created. During
installation you sometimes notice flickering on‐screen (or even the screen
going black for a few seconds). This is often the X Window System
attempting to determine the installed display hardware. While X allows for
graphics, it does not allow for the full desktop experience. For that a
graphical desktop environment is required.
There are many desktop environments available for Linux. Two of the most
well known are KDE and Gnome. For instance Linux Mint uses Mate
(based on Gnome 2) or Cinnamon (based on Gnome 3) desktop
environments. There are also desktop environments such as XFCE,
Openbox and LXQt which are specifically designed to be lightweight. By
the way these desktop environments make Linux the perfect OS for older
hardware. Imagine trying to run Windows 11 with only 1 GB RAM! It will
be really slow. Use a Linux distro with XFCE or Openbox and you will get
reasonably fast performance!
The final piece of the jigsaw is the application software that is installed on
the distribution. This software can be terminal level (i.e. command line) or
graphical applications. Application software makes the distribution. Most
distros will include standard applications such as web browsers, email
clients and office software. while specialist distributions will include
specialist software.

2.3.2 Linux Distributions
A Linux distribution (generally abbreviated to distro) is an operating system
composed of a collection of software that is based on the Linux kernel.
Section 2.3.1 described the major components of the Linux operating
system. Distros use different combinations of software in each of these
layers to create unique operating systems. There are hundreds of Linux
distributions in active use at any one time. DistroWatch provides a summary
of distro popularity. Table 2.2 summarises the most popular Linux distros in
recent years.
Table 2.2 Distro popularity based on Distro Watch page views (April 2024).
April 2020 April 2021
April 2023
April 2024
1
MX Linux MX Linux
MX Linux
MX Linux
2
Manjaro
Manjaro
EndeavourOS Mint
3
Linux Mint Linux Mint
Linux Mint
EndeavourOS
4
Ubuntu
Pop!_OS
Manjaro
Debian
5
Debian
Ubuntu
Pop!_OS
Manjaro
6
Elementary EndeavourOS Ubuntu
Ubuntu
7
Solus
Debian
Fedora
Fedora
8
Zorin
Elementary
Debian
Pop!_OS
9
Fedora
Fedora
Elementary
openSuse
10 Deepin
Open Suse
Lite
Zorin
As can be seen in Table 2.2 there are lots of distros and it is important to
understand their specific features before using them. In this section, some of
the main components of distros that must be considered when choosing
which one to use are discussed.
Linux distributions are more than just the look and feel of the desktop.
Linux distros are customisable. Any software can generally be installed on
any distro. However, how close the original distro is to our end
requirements should be one of our main concerns. Finding the right distro
saves time and user effort. Some of the issues to be considered in
identifying a distribution are:

Package Managers: Different distros have different package
managers. For example, APT is used in Debian‐based distros such as
Ubuntu, Mint, CAInE, Backtrack and of course Debian whereas
Fedora/Red Hat uses YUM (or dnf) for package management. It is not
that difficult to build a program from scratch, but doing so does not
allow automatic updates of that program when new versions are
released. Therefore, the availability of utilities and the ease of using
package managers is very important when selecting a distro.
Desktop Environment: Some graphical desktop environments that
can be used with Linux distributions have already been mentioned.
The choice of distro should be based on the desktop environment
(while the default can be changed it is often easier to find a distro that
uses the favoured desktop system).
Stability vs Cutting Edge: Some distros focus on providing up‐to‐
date versions of packages as quickly as possible whereas others focus
on stability first and only then do they update the packages.
Hardware Compatibility: Drivers in the installer may vary with
different distros making them more or less compatible with the
computer hardware. This is no longer the arduous task that it once was.
Linux support for hardware has improved greatly in recent years
(mainly due to the kernel modules mentioned earlier). Most of the
distributions on the top 10 list (Table 2.2) would provide plug‐and‐play
support for most major hardware manufacturers.
Community Support: Community support is very useful when
troubleshooting. Distros with larger communities often provide quicker
support when needed.
But which distro should you choose for digital forensics? There are two
main options. You can go for a general‐purpose distribution in which you
can install all of the required forensic tools, or you can opt for a digital
forensic distribution. These distributions have many forensic tools pre‐
installed and are also configured specifically for digital
investigation/forensics. For instance when removable media are inserted
into the system, the system will not automount said media. Indeed all

mounting, when done, is read‐only by default. Some examples of
forensic/cybersecurity distros include:
Caine: The Computer‐Aided INvestigative Environment. Forensics,
OSINT and Pen Testing tools are pre‐installed.
Tsurugi: A DFIR (Digital Forensics Incident Response) distro which
has a number of OSINT/Pen Testing tools also installed along with
many digital forensic tools.
Kali: A distro specifically focused on penetration testing which also
contains open‐source intelligence and digital forensic tools.
Backbox: An Ubuntu‐based penetration testing distro.
BlackArch: A penetration testing distro based on Arch Linux.
Pentoo: A penetration testing distro based on Gentoo Linux.
Parrot Security: A penetration testing distro that also contains tools
for other areas of digital investigation.
The choice of distro is yours to make. If you want a ready made forensic
distribution then by all means choose one of the above distros. If you want
to learn more about Linux then choose a general‐purpose distribution such
as Ubuntu, Fedora or Open Suse. What's my choice? Mostly I use a general‐
purpose distribution which is configured for digital investigation. Over the
years I have used all of the major distributions (Debian, Red Hat, Suse, etc.)
but my favourites are generally Debian based. For those reasons I currently
use Linux Mint regularly. The desktop environment is nice and simple (not
too many bells and whistles!), the Apt package manager is used (which is
very easy to use – either through the GUI or directly from the terminal), the
OS is stable and there is great support if something goes wrong. Examples
that you will see in this book have all been created using Linux Mint
(indeed this book was originally typeset using latex running on Linux
Mint!).
2.3.3 A (very) Brief History of Linux
The first public indication that Linux was on the way came in August 1991
when a Finnish student, Linus Torvalds, posted on the Minix OS usenet

group the following message:
Hello everybody out there using minix ‐
I'm doing a (free) operating system (just a hobby, won't be big and
professional like gnu) for 386(486) AT clones. This has been brewing
since April, and is starting to get ready. I'd like any feedback on things
people like/dislike in minix, as my OS resembles it somewhat (same
physical layout of the file‐system (due to practical reasons) among other
things).
I've currently ported bash(1.08) and gcc(1.40), and things seem to work.
This implies that I'll get something practical within a few months, and I'd
like to know what features most people would want. Any suggestions are
welcome, but I won't promise I'll implement them:‐)
Linus (torvalds@kruuna.helsinki.fi)
PS. Yes – it's free of any minix code, and it has a multi‐threaded fs. It is
NOT portable (uses 386 task switching etc.), and it probably never will
support anything other than AT‐harddisks, as that's all I have:‐(.
Torvalds had begun the creation of the Linux kernel as a personal project in
April 1991. There were a number of reasons for this. To that point the main
operating systems available were Unix and Minix. Unix was considered the
best OS at the time but the licensing costs were prohibitive, certainly for
home users. Andrew Tannenbaum, the noted computer scientist, had created
a Mini‐Unix (a.k.a. Minix). The cost of this was still prohibitive (although
not nearly as bad as Unix) and it also lacked some of the desired Unix
functionality. Linus Torvalds set out to write a version of Minix that was as
complete as Unix and could be distributed to anyone!
As seen from Torvald's initial usenet posting in August 1991, Linux was
originally just aimed at the 386 architecture and nothing more. Torvalds
never thought that Linux would run on everything! Now Linux runs on
almost every piece of hardware in use!
Linux kernel version 0.01 was released on 17 September 1991 but had
limited functionality. Indeed Torvalds never publicised the fact that this
version was available. Version 0.02 was very quickly released (5 October
1991). This version included a ported version of GNU Bash (the terminal

interface) and GNU gcc (the C compiler). The addition of these two utilities
meant that there was now a usable operating system available. People could
install Linux and actually do something with it! Very quickly all of the
GNU utilities were ported to the new Linux kernel and it began to be used
more frequently.
Interest in Linux exploded in the early 1990s. The first distributions
appeared in 1992, with most of the modern distribution families present by
1996 (Slackware and Debian ‐ 1993, Red Hat ‐ 1994, and Suse ‐ 1996).
Many of these distros included the X Window System allowing for simple
graphical interfaces to the Linux kernel.
The mid‐1990s saw the development of more feature‐rich graphical
environments such as KDE (1996) and Gnome (1997). These two systems
are still in common use today. They have also both led to numerous forks
over the years meaning that most Linux graphical systems can trace their
roots to one of these competing systems.
The next section provides a brief tour of Linux Mint. Note for those of you
that are familiar with Linux you should skip ahead to Section 2.4.2. If you
are also familiar with the Linux terminal interface then you should skip
directly to Section 2.5.
2.4 Using Linux
Figure 2.3 shows a running Linux Mint system. Linux Mint uses a
Windows‐like desktop metaphor in which files/folders can be stored
directly on the desktop. The Linux Mint system also provides a Start Menu‐
like system in the bottom left of the screen. Adjacent to this is a task bar,
showing the running applications. The bottom right corner of the screen
shows the system tray icons.

Figure 2.3 The Linux Mint desktop immediately after login.
As with Windows the system tray will show the status of various
components in the Linux Mint OS. This includes the current network and
battery status, information about software upgrades, date and time, etc. The
Linux Mint menu is shown in Figure 2.4, again this is similar to the
Windows start menu, providing search functionality and also access to all
the installed applications.

Figure 2.4 The Linux Mint Menu showing the various application
categories.
One of the most commonly used applications in this book is the Linux
terminal (also called the shell). The terminal is an application which allows
interaction with the system through a command‐line interface. Most of the
examples that are encountered in this book are generated from the Linux
terminal.

The terminal provides a prompt at which the user can input a command.
Once the user has input the command it is parsed by the shell (e.g. Bash),
the shell displays the output on screen and then presents the prompt to the
user as it awaits the next command. The terminal in Linux Mint can be
accessed through the main menu under Administration  Terminal. Figure
2.5 shows the Linux terminal awaiting input.
Figure 2.5 The Linux Mint terminal application.
2.4.1 User Accounts
One of the most important concepts in Linux is that of the user account, and
specifically the root user. The root user in a Linux system has the rights to
perform any action on the system (this includes some pretty terminal
actions such as deleting ALL files on the system). Generally in most Linux
systems the first user account that is created (during the installation process)
is a member of a special group that allow these users to become the root
user. In general all actions in Linux should be performed from a normal
user account except when it is necessary to perform an action as root. For
instance to access a physical disk when acquiring an image requires root
access. Root access, for a single command, can be achieved using sudo.
Listing 2.5 shows the means by which root access is gained. Note in this
example the command whoami is used from the Linux terminal. This
command merely prints the current username. Best practice in Linux usage
would advise that users use the root account only when absolutely essential.

In order to gain temporary root access the command whoami is prefixed
with another command sudo – sometimes called super user do! Upon
executing this command the Linux system will check if the user account
that is running the command (fergus in Listing 2.5) is a member of the
sudo group. If so the user is prompted for their password. Once
authenticated the command is executed with root privileges. This is often
necessary for certain digital forensic tasks, in particular when accessing a
physical device, for instance when creating a forensic image of a storage
device.
2.4.2 Basic Linux Commands
This section provides an overview of the basic Linux commands. These
commands are broken into common tasks such as navigating the file system
and getting help. In each section a number of commands are provided that
the reader should further explore.
2.4.2.1 Navigating the File System
One of the difficulties that many Linux newcomers face is the simple act of
navigating the file system. It is first necessary to determine our current
location in the file system. Generally when a terminal is executed the
session will begin in the user's home directory. Consider a user named
fergus. The default home directory for this user is /home/fergus. Listing 2.6
shows the command used to determine the present working directory
immediately after running the terminal application. As expected this shows
that the user is in /home/fergus.

Once the location is determined it is necessary to determine what
files/directories are present in that location. The basic command to list
files/folders is ls. Listing 2.7 shows the output of ls in the current directory.8
The general terminal command structure is:
command [options] [arguments]
When arguments are provided to a command the command will be run upon
those arguments. In Listing 2.7 no arguments are provided to the ls
command. Arguments are not necessary for this command as, by default, it
operates in the current directory. Options are not provided for the command
in this case although the ls command can take both arguments and options.
Listing 2.8 shows an example of the ls command in which both options and
arguments are provided to the command.
Instead of listing the contents of the current directory the argument
Downloads/9 is provided to the ls command. This has the effect of listing
the contents of the Downloads directory rather than the current directory.
Additionally the options ‐lh are provided to the command. These have the
effect of listing the files in a long format (which provides the permissions,
owner, group, size, modification date, etc.) for the file (‐l) and providing the
file size in a human‐readable format (‐h). Most Linux commands can take
options/arguments.
But how does a user traverse the file system? The way to achieve this is
through the cd command. The cd command takes as argument the directory

to which the user wishes to change. For instance in Listing 2.9 the user
changes to the Downloads directory, back up to the home directory (.. is a
special directory name for the parent directory) and then into Documents.
The combination of cd and pwd allows the user to navigate the file system.
Note that the directory names that have been presented to this point are
relative to the current directory. It is possible to provide absolute directory
names also. Consider the command in Listing 2.10. This takes the user
immediately to a directory called /etc.
As with the ls command the cd command has a default argument if none is
provided. In the case of running the cd command without an argument the
user is immediately returned to their home directory. This is shown in
Listing 2.11.
2.4.2.2 Getting Help
As one becomes more familiar with the terminal it quickly becomes clear
how complex the environment is. There are many commands, each of

which can have many options. How is it possible to remember all of these?
The answer to this (for most people) is that it is not! Instead Linux provides
a help system called the manual system. This is access through the man
command.
Most commands have a help or manual page. Listing 2.12 shows part of the
manual page for the pwd command. The space bar is used to move through
the manual page. Use ‘q’ to exit the manual system.
2.4.2.3 Viewing/Editing Text Files
Files can be created using any text editor. All of the graphical distros
provide a graphical text editor from the main menu (similar to Notepad on
Windows) but there are also text editors available at the terminal. These
include nano (sometimes called pico), emacs and vi. The nano editor is by
far the simplest of these.
Text files can also be viewed from the terminal. There are a number of tools
that can do this including:
cat: The cat command will display the entire contents of a file.
Multiple files can be provided as argument and the cat command will
display them all. Strictly speaking the cat command is used to
concatenate files, taking multiple files as input and creating a new file
containing the contents of all input files as output. When provided with

a single input file and as the output is displayed on the terminal by
default it has the effect of displaying the file's content to the user.
more: The more command is a pager, showing a file one page at a
time. Pages are advanced using the space bar (the command can be
exited at any stage using ‘q’).
less: The less command is another pager that is very similar to more.
Historically there were differences in them but over time these have
been reduced.
head: The head command will display the first 10 lines of a text file
by default. This behaviour can be changed using head ‐n 5 for instance
to display the first five lines of the file.
tail: The tail command by default displays the last 10 lines of a text
file. Similar to the head command the number of lines can be modified
using ‐n x where x is the number of lines to be displayed.
2.4.2.4 Managing Directories
The mkdir command is used to create a directory. For instance in the home
directory a directory called Files is created using the command shown in
Listing 2.13. Note that the cd command is first issued to ensure that the
home directory is the current directory.
2.4.2.5 Redirection and Pipes
All of the commands introduced to this point have displayed their output on
the terminal itself. There are two output streams by default in Linux,
STDOUT (Standard Output) and STDERR (Standard Error). By default
most output is sent to STDOUT; however, error messages are often sent to
STDERR. By default both of these streams default to the terminal but they
can be redirected. Consider the simple pwd command shown in Listing 2.6.

In this the command's result was displayed on the terminal screen itself.
What actually happened was that the command printed information to
STDOUT which was directed to the terminal. It is possible to redirect these
output streams. Consider the command in Listing 2.14.
The redirection of STDOUT is performed using the 
 operator. This has
the effect of saving the output from the command in the specified filename
(directory.txt in this case). This can prove invaluable during forensic
analysis as it provides a quick means of saving output for further analysis or
reporting. The STDERR stream can also be redirected using 2
.
There is also an input stream called STDIN (Standard Input). This can also
be redirected using 
. Additionally the shell provides one more redirect
effect called a pipe. In this the output of one command is used as the input
to another command. Later in this book pipes will be used extensively,
especially to filter output from commands. At this stage the considered
example is trivial.
Consider the effect of the command cat /etc/passwd. This displays the
contents of the /etc/passwd file in the terminal. However, this file is
generally too large to be seen on a single screen. Instead of allowing the
output to be sent to the screen, it can be piped to the more command to
allow the output to be viewed one page at a time. This is shown in Listing
2.15.10
2.5 Linux as a Forensic Platform
The Linux OS can be used very effectively as a digital forensic platform. As
shown in Section 2.1.1 Linux has a number of advantages over traditional

closed‐source software. In terms of digital forensics and specifically file
system forensics, Linux supports a large number of file systems. Support
for others can be added very quickly. The open‐source nature of the Linux
OS (and most of the software available for the Linux OS) means that
analysts can have more confidence in the results achieved in digital forensic
analysis. This is of vital importance as people's lives often depend on the
outcome of these tools.
2.5.1 Commands for Digital Forensics
Another benefit of using Linux as a forensic platform is the number of in‐
built tools which are of direct benefit to file system forensics. This section
examines some of these tools. Linux provides as standard tools for
calculating hash values, viewing hex, etc. (see below). Each of these (and
many more) is of direct benefit to file system forensics.
In addition to the inbuilt Linux commands that are of use in file system
forensics, there are also a number of tools written specifically for file
system forensics that are available on the Linux system. These include tools
for disk imaging, data carving and file system forensic analysis. Some of
these tools will be covered in Chapter 4.
2.5.1.1 Hashing
A hash (also called a message digest) is a fixed length number representing
a piece of data. It can also be considered a function which maps arbitrarily
sized data to a fixed length. Generally the hash is a one‐way function,
meaning that it is very easy to calculate the hash value from the data, but
impossible to reverse the process and generate the data from the hash.
Hashes are used in digital investigation for a number of reasons:
1. To ensure evidential integrity: When digital evidence is acquired a
hash of that value is taken. This hash is maintained (and checked)
throughout the investigation. Once the hash value matches it is certain
that the content of the evidence has not changed during our analysis.
2. To eliminate known good files from an investigation: There are
many files that are encountered regularly in investigation that are of no
interest. For instance every Windows 10 computer has the same
Windows logo image, every Facebook page has the same logos, etc.

These are known good files, files which have been encountered
previously and are known to be of no interest. By maintaining a list of
hash values for these files they can be automatically eliminated from
the investigation.
3. To identify known bad files: There are also files that have been
encountered previously that contain illegal material. These are known
bad files. A list of their hash values can be used to automatically
identify them in a new case. Note that technically this process is
identical to eliminating known good files, the only difference is that a
different action is performed with bad and good files when they are
identified.
From the above uses it is clear that hashing is most definitely an important
tool for digital forensics. There are a number of hashing algorithm choices
available which are generally divided into two families, Message Digest
and Secure Hash Algorithm hashes.
The MD5 algorithm is the only member of the Message Digest family that
is still in common usage. It produces a 128 bit hash value. Every Linux
distro provides the md5sum command to generate an MD5 hash value.
Listing 2.16 shows an example of this hash in use. This begins by
calculating the MD5 hash value for the text “Hello World”. The second
version of the command calculated the MD5 for the text “Hello world”, in
which the case of a single character has been changed. Notice that the
resulting hash value is completely different to the original.
Generally this command is run on a file rather than STDIN. To do this
merely run the command with the filename provided as an argument. For
instance md5sum river.jpg will calculate the MD5 value for the file called
river.jpg.

The Secure Hash Algorithm is a more recent version of hashing algorithm
designed to replace MD5. There are four versions of SHA:
SHA‐0: A flaw was discovered very early in this and it is no longer
used.
SHA‐1: Produces a 160 bit hash (compared to MD5's 128 bit). Some
weaknesses are present in this algorithm.
SHA‐2: Consists of two hashing algorithms (SHA256 and SHA512)
which have 256/512 bit hash values.
SHA‐3: The previous variants are all designed by NSA (US National
Security Agency). SHA‐3 algorithms were designed by others, but
generally produce 256+ bit hash values.
Listing 2.17 shows the SHA1, SHA256 and SHA512 values for “Hello
World”.
One caveat with the use of hashing algorithms is that hash collisions can
occur. A hash collision occurs when two (or more) distinct items have the
same hash value. You might ask how this can occur as a hash is meant to be
unique. Well, yes, but there is only a finite set of hash values. Consider the
case of using MD5. MD5 generates 128 bit hash values. That means there
are 
 possible hash values. Now imagine that in a (very) large
investigation 
 files have been encountered. Mathematically it is
now guaranteed that there exists a hash collision, in other words two files
will have the same hash value. In mathematics this is known as the Pigeon
Hole Principle. Probability would state that the collision would occur long
before arriving at 
 files, but at that point it is guaranteed.

Smaller hash values lead to a higher probability of collision; hence, MD5 is
considered the least secure (i.e. most likely to have collisions) of the
hashing algorithms introduced in this lesson. Hash collisions can be
demonstrated using a simple hashing algorithm called crc32 as shown in
Listing 2.18.
In order to avoid (or at least reduce the probability of) a hash collision it is
better to use the hashing algorithm with the largest output (e.g. SHA512);
however, for most uses any of the hashing algorithms presented in this
section (except crc32) are suitable for use. To further reduce the probability
of collision multiple hashing algorithms can be used. For instance both
MD5 and SHA1 can be used which greatly reduce the probability of
collision.
2.5.1.2 Hex Viewers
There are a number of hex viewers available for Linux, both at the
command line level and also using graphical interfaces. Most Linux
distributions will provide hexdump and xxd by default. These are both
terminal‐based commands. There are also a number of graphical hex editors
available such as bless, okteta and wxHexEditor.
Listing 2.19 shows the xxd command being used to view the partition table
from the second hard drive on a Linux system (/dev/sdb). Note that it is
necessary to have root access to perform this operation (hence sudo is
used). The partition table structure is covered in Section 4.2. Two options
are provided to xxd in this example. The first is ‐s which provides the
number of bytes which should be skipped. In other words instead of
beginning the hex dump at byte zero it will begin at byte 
. The second
option (‐l) specifies the number of bytes that should be displayed (
 in
this case).

Without any options the xxd command will begin at the first byte in the
input file (i.e. ‐s 0) and will display the entire file content.
2.5.1.3 Archiving/Compression
Digital forensics involves handling large volumes of data. As such the
ability to compress data is of vital importance. Linux provides support for
most common archive/compression formats. One of the most common linux
archiving formats is that of tar, the tape archive. Obviously tapes are a
thing of the past, but the name has remained. The tar command is merely
an archiving command that gathers multiple files together in one single
archive. Hence the resulting file is generally larger than all of the input files
combined. However, the tar command can be combined with a number of
compression programs (this includes gzip and bzip). Listing 2.20 shows the
creation of a compressed archive, while Listing 2.21 shows the extraction of
said archive.
The tar command allows for a number of actions. Listing 2.20 shows ‐c
being used to create an archive while Listing 2.21 shows ‐x used to extract
that artefact. The ‐z option shows that gzip compression should be used.
Other compression options are available including ZIP archives. This can be
created using: zip archive.zip file1 file2 file3, which creates an archive
(archive.zip) containing three files: file1, file2 and file3. ZIP archives can
be extracted using unzip archive.zip.

2.5.1.4 The file Command
One of the most commonly encountered anti‐forensic techniques is that of
extension hiding. Consider a JPEG image file which a suspect wishes to
hide from forensic analysis. The suspect might change the name of this
from picture.jpg to text.txt. Most operating systems would determine this
to be a text file (based on the .txt extension) and not a picture as it actually
is.
The Linux system provides the file command which can determine the
actual type of a file by reading the file's contents. Listing 2.22 shows the
file command being used on a file called text.txt.
The file command analyses the actual raw file content. Consider a JPEG
image file. The JPEG standard specifies that all files must begin with the
hex values 0xFFD811 and end with the hex values 0xFFD9. This can be
seen in Listing 2.23.
The majority of digital forensic platforms provide functionality to
determine extension mismatches where the file extension is different to that
expected by the file content, e.g. if a file's content begins with 0xFFD8 and
yet its file extension is txt. In Linux this behaviour is in‐built in all
distributions through the file command.
2.5.1.5 The strings Command
In many cases textual information is of vital importance. The strings
command displays all printable characters (ASCII) found in a file,

regardless of file type. Even binary data can be provided to strings and it
will display the printable characters in the file.
The strings command is invoked using: strings [options] filename where
filename can be any file type. The command can also be used on a disk
image to search for particular pieces of text in the image. When strings is
combined with egrep it results in a very powerful forensic tool, allowing
for all instances of particular text (and textual patterns) to be located.
Listing 2.24, shows the basic use of strings. In this, strings is run on
/dev/sda2 (note the output has been truncated), a partition which contains
an NTFS file system.
The output immediately hints that there is an NTFS file system present
(bytes 3–6 in an NTFS file system contain the OEM name which is NTFS).
The information presented in Listing 2.24 shows only that the information
is present. Imagine that /dev/sda2 is 1 TB in size and it is necessary to
locate this text. The strings command tells only that it is present, not where
it is located.
Like most Linux commands the behaviour of strings can be altered with
options. The first of these is ‐t which allows the specification of a radix
(base) in which we wish the output reported. This option will produce the
same as before but each string will have a byte offset showing where
exactly it occurred in the input file. Now, when searching for a particular
piece of text it is possible to go directly to the point in the disk at which that
text was found. Listing 2.25 shows the same data as Listing 2.24, but this
time using ‐td to display the location of the discovered strings. The ‐td
options will display the byte offset as decimal.

As expected the first NTFS string occurs at offset 3. A hex viewer could
now be used to jump directly to this point of interest in the device.
2.5.1.6 Text Searching with (e)grep
The grep family of commands allows the user to locate certain textual
patterns in large volumes of data. The general regular expression parser
(grep) searches textual data for regular expressions, patterns that express
the textual properties that are sought. When grep finds a match to the
pattern the entire line of output in which that match occurs is displayed to
the user. This can be used to filter uninteresting textual data from analysis.
The simplest regular expressions merely involve actual text. For instance
Listing 2.26 shows searching for root in the /etc/passwd file.
However, regular expressions can be used for much more than merely
searching for exact text. They can be used for searching for email addresses,
IP addresses, credit card numbers, etc. Indeed any structured textual
information can be sought using a regular expression. Most digital forensic
tools utilise these in string searching modules that are included by default.
A complete introduction to grep and regular expressions is beyond the
scope of this book. However, it is a topic that can be of great utility and it is
worth pursuing in further detail.

2.6 Summary
This chapter examined the Linux operating system and more generally the
nature of open‐source software. In digital forensics the use of open‐source
software allows for validation of the techniques that are being used and as
such increases the confidence in the results of said tools. This increased
confidence means that there is less chance of miscarriages of justice.
The GNU/Linux OS is considered the classic example of open‐source
software. The Linux kernel supports many file systems which make it an
ideal system to use for file system forensics. GNU/Linux also provides a
host of tools that can be of use in digital forensics. This includes tools for
hashing, text searching, information presentation, etc. In addition to these
in‐built tools there are also a number of specific tools available for digital
forensics. These include file system forensic and data carving tools. These
will be introduced in Chapter 4. These facts make GNU/Linux an ideal
candidate for use as a digital forensics workstation.
Exercises/Discussion Topics
The following are suggested topics for discussion in relation to Linux as a
forensic platform and open‐source software. Students are expected to
research the topics more thoroughly in order to discuss them.
1. Describe the advantages of open‐source software when compared with
closed‐source software.
2. Why is open‐source software particularly good for file system
forensics (and digital forensics in general)?
3. In your opinion what is the main reason for using open‐source
software during an investigation?
4. In relation to digital investigation does closed‐source software provide
any advantages over open‐source software? If so what do you consider
these advantages to be?
5. What specific advantages does Linux have over other operating
systems in relation to file system forensic analysis?

6. If the digital forensic community were to adopt Linux as a ‘standard’
operating system, what challenges would you foresee?
7. Digital forensic distributions such as Deft and Caine have many
advantages for the digital investigator. Can you see any disadvantages
in using these specialist distributions rather than a general‐purpose
distribution for file system forensics?
8. Use Linux! As a final ‘exercise’ in this chapter it is recommended that
you begin to use the Linux OS (if you don't already do so). All
examples presented in the remainder of this book will be done through
the Linux terminal. Therefore knowledge of the OS will make it much
easier to follow the book… also I am convinced that you will fall in
love with the OS once you become more familiar with it.
Bibliography
Altheide, C. and Carvey, H.A. (2011). Digital Forensics with Open Source
Tools: Using Open Source Platform Tools for Performing Computer
Forensics on Target Systems: Windows, Mac, Linux, UNIX, etc.
Rockland, MA:Syngress; Oxford.
Ashawa, M.A. and Ntonja, M. (2019). Design and implementation of Linux
based workflow for digital forensics investigation. International Journal
of Computer Applications 181 (49): 40–46.
Bresnahan, R. (2021). Linux Command Line and Shell Scripting Bible. SL,
Hoboken, NJ:Wiley.
Bromhead, B. (2017). 10 advantages of open source for the enterprise
[Internet]. Opensource.com. [updated 2017; cited 2024 April 3].
https://opensource.com/article/17/8/enterprise-open-source-advantages
(accessed 12 August 2024).
Carrier, B. (2002). Open source digital forensics tools: the legal argument
[Internet]. [updated 2002; cited 2024 April 3].
https://www.engineering.iastate.edu/guan/course/backup-0982/CprE-
592-YG-Fall-2002/paper/atstakeopensourceforensics.pdf (accessed 12
August 2024).

Citizensinformation.ie (2024). Disclosure in criminal cases [Internet].
www.citizensinformation.ie [cited 2024 April 3].
https://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/justice/criminal_law/criminal_trial
/disclosure_in_criminal_cases.html (accessed 12 August 2024).
Free Software Foundation (2019). Working Together for Free Software
[Internet]. Fsf.org. [cited 2024 April 3]. https://www.fsf.org/ (accessed
12 August 2024).
Garda Ombudsman (2024). Non‐party disclosure [cited 2024 April 3].
https://www.gardaombudsman.ie/about-gsoc/non-party-disclosure/
(accessed 16 December 2024).
GeeksforGeeks (2021). Top 10 Hex Editors for Linux [Internet].
GeeksforGeeks [cited 2024 April 3]. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/top-
10-hex-editors-for-linux/ (accessed 12 August 2024).
GeeksforGeeks (2023). History of Linux [Internet]. GeeksforGeeks [cited
2024 April 3]. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/linux-history/ (accessed
12 August 2024).
gnu.org (2024). What is Copyleft? ‐ gnu.org [Internet]. www.gnu.org [cited
2024 April 3]. https://www.gnu.org/licenses/copyleft.en.html (accessed
12 August 2024).
Gupta, S., Goyal, N., and Aggarwal, K. (2014). A review of comparative
study of MD5 and SSH security algorithm. International Journal of
Computers and Applications 104 (14): 1–4.
Hayward, D. (2012). The history of Linux: how time has shaped the
penguin [Internet]. TechRadar [cited 2024 April 3].
https://www.techradar.com/news/software/operating-systems/the-
history-of-linux-how-time-has-shaped-the-penguin-1113914 (accessed
12 August 2024).
Lestal, J. (2020). How many programming languages are there? –
DevSkiller [Internet]. DevSkiller ‐ Powerful tool to test developers skills
[cited 2024 April 3]. https://devskiller.com/how-many-programming-
languages/ (accessed 12 August 2024).

Manson, D., Carlin, A., Ramos, S. et al. (2007). Is the open way a better
way? Digital forensics using open source tools. In: 2007 40th Annual
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS'07), –
266b. IEEE.
Matthias, K.D. and Welsh, M. (2006). Running Linux. Sebastopol,
CA:O'Reilly.
Negus, C. (2020). Linux Bible. John Wiley & Sons Canada, Limited.
Nemeth, E., Snyder, G., Hein, T.R. et al. (2017). Unix and Linux System
Administration Handbook. Prentice Hall.
Nikkel, B. (2016). Practical Forensic Imaging: Securing Digital Evidence
with Linux Tools. San Francisco, CA:No Starch Press.
OpenSource (2019). What is open source? [Internet]. Opensource.com.
[cited 2024 April 3]. https://opensource.com/resources/what-open-source
(accessed 12 August 2024).
Sachdeva, S., Raina, B.L., and Sharma, A. (2020). Analysis of digital
forensic tools. Journal of Computational and Theoretical Nanoscience
17 (6): 2459–2467.
Santoshi, D., Pulgam, N., and Mane, V. (2022). Analysis and Simulation of
Kali Linux Digital Forensic Tools. Available at SSRN 4111750.
UpCounsel (2024). What Does Disclosure Mean in Law? [Internet].
UpCounsel [cited 2024 April 3]. https://www.upcounsel.com/what-does-
disclosure-mean-in-law (accessed 12 August 2024).
Vaughan‐Nichols, S.J. (2024). Linux turns 30: the biggest events in its
history so far [Internet]. ZDNET [cited 2024 April 3].
https://www.zdnet.com/pictures/linux-turns-30-the-biggest-events-in-its-
history-so-far/ (accessed 12 August 2024).
Williams, R. (2024). A basic guide to disclosure [Internet]. Weightmans
[cited 2024 April 3, 4]. https://www.weightmans.com/insights/a-basic-
guide-to-disclosure/ (accessed 12 August 2024).

Notes
1 As to the number of programming languages that exist, nobody is certain!
There are various lists of languages available, of which the smallest
contains only the 150 most commonly encountered languages, to the
largest which contains almost 9000 languages.
2 Generally the first program that everyone writes when learning to code is
Hello World. The origins of this are uncertain but they are linked to the
very early days of the C programming language in 1974, although some
claim that its origins were earlier than this, either with the B
programming language in 1972 or BCPL in 1967. While the exact origin
is unclear every programmer has written multiple Hello World programs
during their career!
3 It is possible to decompile an executable file. However, with the possible
complexities inherent in programs it is unlikely that the resulting source
code will be identical to that written by the programmer, although it
should be functionally equivalent.
4 https://opensource.com/resources/what-open-source.
5 Figures current as of March 2023. Source:
https://w3techs.com/technologies/overview/web_server.
6 https://legal-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/disclosure.
7 https://www.pinsentmasons.com/out-law/guides/disclosure-and-privilege.
8 The output that you see will be similar but not identical to the output
shown in this example.
9 The Linux terminal is case sensitive meaning that ls Downloads/ and ls
downloads/ are different commands.
10 As stated earlier this example is trivial. The exact same functionality
could be achieved using more /etc/passwd.
11 The standard defines a larger starting signature dependent on the actual
version of JPEG and the features that are supported; however, all JPEG

files will begin with 0xFFD8.
OceanofPDF.com

3
Mathematical Preliminaries
In order to understand how any file system functions it is first necessary to
understand how information is represented in a computer system.
Computers and indeed all electronic digital devices are binary in nature
meaning that they are capable only of handling 0's and 1's. The
interpretation of long sequences of 0's and 1's leads to all the information
that is found in computer systems: numbers; text; pictures; audio;
spreadsheets; databases; etc.
In order to conduct digital forensic analysis and, more importantly, to
understand the results of digital forensic analysis it is necessary to first
understand the underlying storage schema used for all types of data.
This chapter examines how numbers, text and time are represented in
computing systems. It examines number systems, showing how decimal is
related to binary and hexadecimal and also how to convert between these
number systems. The various encoding schemes that are used to represent
text are introduced, in particular those that are most often encountered such
as ASCII, ISO‐8859, UTF‐8 and UTF‐16. Time is of vital importance in any
investigation and computer systems generally provide a wealth of time
information. As such this chapter discusses how time is represented in
various operating and file systems. Finally this chapter will show how
information is actually stored on a hard drive either in big‐ or little‐endian
formats. In little‐endian the byte order is reversed meaning little‐endian data
must be converted to a big‐endian format before interpretation begins. The
ultimate aim of this chapter is to provide the reader with the skills to
manually interpret raw data when encountered during an investigation.
3.1 Bits and Bytes
In order to effectively communicate about information representation in
computing systems it is first necessary to understand certain terminology.

When speaking about storage capacity/size the most fundamental unit is the
bit, one single binary digit. Hence a bit has the value 0 or 1.
Computers gather bits together into larger, more complex structures. Table
3.1 summarises these structural units. How many values can be stored by
each of the structures? The method of calculating the number of possible
values that can be represented by a particular number of bits is quite simple.
Merely raise 2 to the power of the number of bits. Table 3.2 summarises
this.
Table 3.1 Group names for binary digits.
Number of Bits Term(s)
1
Bit
4
Nibble
8
Byte
16
Word
32
Long (or Double Word)
64
Very Long
Table 3.2 Number of values for each of the common powers of two!
Number of Bits Number of Values
1
4
8
16
32
64
This knowledge provides clues as to how information is stored in computers
and also why certain limitations exist! Consider the Internet Protocol
Version 4 (IPv4) addresses. Networking knowledge informs us that these
addresses consist of four decimal numbers between 0 and 255, separated by

dots. For instance 192.168.1.12 is a valid IP address. But many people ask,
why the strange maximum number, why not 999?
The reason for this limitation is based on Table 3.2. If the possible values
for each number are 0 to 255, then there are a total of 256 possible values
for each number in the IPv4 IP address. A single byte (eight bits) also
allows for 256 values. IP addresses are limited to numbers between 0 and
255 as they are using four individual bytes to represent these numbers. You
might also have heard that there are just over four billion IPv4 addresses.
Consider the theory that an IP address consists of four bytes, this means the
entire IP address is a 32 bit structure. Hence the limitation of just over four
billion addresses. Table 3.2 shows that 32 bits can represent 4,294,967,
 possible values, which is exactly the number of possible IPv4
addresses!
But what about larger values? One of the largest problems in computer
forensics is the sheer volume of information that requires handling. We
don't refer to a disk as having a capacity of 1,099,511,627,
 bytes:
instead we say 1 terabyte (although this is incorrect as will be shown in a
moment!).
Before proceeding to consider larger groups of bytes it is necessary to
determine if they will be measured in a decimal‐ or binary‐based system.
Traditionally larger units of storage can be measured as 1000x bytes or as
1024x bytes. The first case is a decimal (base 10) multiple, also called the
SI (International System of Units) system, while the second case is the
binary system. When people refer to large collections of bytes there is often
confusion as to exactly what is meant. Table 3.3 summarises the larger byte
collections and the names/notation that will be used in this book.

Table 3.3 Decimal/binary prefixes and values.
Decimal
Binary
Symbol Prefix Meaning
Symbol Prefix Meaning
K
Kilo
Ki
Kibi
M
Mega
Mi
Mebi
G
Giga
Gi
Gibi
T
Tera
Ti
Tebi
P
Peta
Pi
Pebi
E
Exa
Ei
Exbi
Z
Zetta
Zi
Zebi
Y
Yotta
Yi
Yobi
Table 3.3 shows that a kilobyte means 1000 bytes while a kibibyte
represents 1024 bytes. These values are often incorrectly used
synonymously in common conversation but also by disk vendors on
occasion!
The structures examined to this point are based on multiples of the byte but
what about smaller structures? Bytes can be broken into smaller
components, where groups of particular bits represent certain pieces of
information. These are called bit fields. To demonstrate bit fields we
introduce a classic example, the FAT date and time values.
FAT Date and Time are encountered in FAT file systems for metadata
storage. The FAT file system records the Modified, Accessed and Created
Dates, along with the Modified and Created times. All of these values are
stored as FAT Date/Time values which are two byte values composed of bit
fields. Figures 3.1 and 3.2 show the structure of the FAT Date and Time,
respectively.

Figure 3.1 FAT date bit field structure.
In the FAT Date value the five least significant bits represent the day. Five
bits allow for 
 (
) possible values, enough to store the values between
1 and 31 to represent all of the valid days of the month. The next four bits
represent the month, four bits allowing for 
 (
) values. This leaves
seven bits to represent the year. Seven bits allows for 
 (
) possible
values or the years 0–127 AD! Obviously computers weren't very common
in 127 AD, so the FAT Date actually begins in 1980. The value that is
encountered in the seven‐bit bit field is added to 1980 to give the correct
year. Hence if the value 
 is discovered in this bit field, it represents the
year 2021.
Figure 3.2 FAT time bit field structure.
The FAT Time stores information in a similar manner. The five most
significant bits represent the hour. Five bits provide 
 possible values,
enough to represent the numbers 0–
. The subsequent six bits represent

the minutes, six bits allow for 
 values in total. This leaves five bits to
represent the seconds. However, five bits only allow for 
 possible
values (0–
), meaning it is not possible to represent all values. Instead
the FAT time represents the number of seconds divided by 2, rather than the
actual number of seconds. This means that the FAT file system can only
distinguish between actions which happen more than two seconds apart.
Bit fields (an older form of storage technology) are rarely used in modern
systems. This is due to the cost of storage space in the early days of
computing. Each byte was valuable, so space was never wasted. The cost of
storage space has decreased so much in recent years that this limitation no
longer applies. Therefore modern systems are less likely to use bit fields,
although as we will see they are occasionally still encountered.
3.2 Number Systems
One of the first things necessary to represent (and interpret) is numeric data.
Computers use the binary number system to store numeric data. This
section examines number systems in general before proceeding to look at
the most commonly encountered number systems in computing, being
decimal (as that is what humans understand), binary (as computers can only
use ones and zeros) and hexadecimal (as hexadecimal is an easier method
of representing binary data). The difference between number systems is in
their base, the number of unique digits that the number system contains.
The base of binary is 2 (the digits are 0 and 1), the base of decimal is 10
(digits 0–9) and the hexadecimal base is 16 (digits 0–9 along with A–F).
Once the number systems have been described this section proceeds to
show how to convert between number systems. The basic number systems
allow only the natural numbers (i.e. the non‐negative integers: 0, 1, 2, 3, …)
to be represented. Computers need to represent more than just these values;
hence, the final topics in this section examine how computers represent
negative and floating‐point numbers also. However, before proceeding it is
necessary to introduce the notational conventions that will be used in the
remainder of this book.

3.2.1 Notational Conventions
When humans see a number such as 100 the assumption is that this is a
decimal number with the value one hundred. As forensic analysts this
number could be in any number system (most likely one of binary, decimal
or hexadecimal). Therefore a notational convention is used which displays
the number along with the number system so that the value can be correctly
interpreted. There are a number of ways this can be achieved. For instance
to write 100 as a decimal number any of the following notations might be
used:
0d100
In each case it is clear that the number 
 is in the decimal number
system, thereby allowing analysts to correctly interpret the value. Generally
a letter is used to represent the base, 
 for decimal, 
 for binary, 
 (or 
) for hex and 
 for octal (base 8). The actual numeric base itself can also
be used as seen in the final example, i.e. 
. This is particularly useful
if using a non‐standard number system. For instance, a value in a base 5
number system might be written as 
. Throughout this book the above
conventions will be used for representing all numbers!
3.2.2 Decimal
The decimal number system is the de facto standard in daily life. Much of
the world uses decimal as standard. Historically there were some famous
exceptions to this. For instance the Sumerian and Babylonian civilisations
used a base 60 number system, while many South American cultures (e.g.
Aztec and Mayan.) used a base 20 number system. Indeed many of the Inuit
peoples of North America use a base 20 number system to this day
(Kaktovik numerals).
The decimal number system is an example of a place‐value system. In a
place‐value system the value of a digit is a combination of the digit itself
and also the place that it appears in the number. Consider the decimal

number 
. This number is composed of multiple instances of one
single digit, each occurrence of which has a different value due to its
position. If you remember your elementary school education you most
likely learnt that 
 was three hundreds, three tens and three ones (also
called units). This is the basis of the place‐value system. All modern
number systems (regardless of their base) operate in this fashion.
More correctly the place‐value system assigns an exponent to each place.
Beginning at the least significant place (i.e. the rightmost position) with an
exponent of zero and increasing by 1 for each place to the left. To get the
value of a digit in a particular place the base is raised to the power of the
exponent which is then multiplied by the digit. This is demonstrated below
for 
. As this is a decimal number the base is 10.
Digits 3
3
3
Exponents 2
1
0
Values 3 * 102 3 * 101
= 3 * 100 3 * 10
= 300d
30d
Total
The above result appears to be trivial, merely showing that 
.
However, it is much more fundamental than it might first appear. All
modern number systems use the place‐value system, meaning that the above
system holds true in each case. Once a number's base is known the
corresponding decimal value can be easily calculated using the above
system.

3.2.3 Binary
The binary number system uses a base of two, meaning there are only two
valid digits (generally called bits) which are 0 and 1. Binary is vital to our
understanding of information as it is how all information is represented in
an electronic storage device. Binary again uses a place‐value system in
which the base is 2. Consider the number 
. In order to convert this
number to decimal the place‐value system is used. This is shown below.
Digits 1
0
1
1
Exponents 3
2
1
0
Values 1 * 23 0 * 22 1 * 21
= 1 * 8 0 * 4 1 * 2
= 8d
0d
2d
Total
Hence the binary number 
 is the equivalent of 
.
3.2.4 Hexadecimal
Hexadecimal is a base 16 number system commonly encountered in digital
forensics. Hexadecimal uses the decimal digits 0–9 alongside the letters 
–
 where 
 is 10, 
 is 11, 
 is 12 and so on. Hexadecimal again uses
the place‐value system meaning that the conversion of these values to
decimal is trivial. Consider the number 
. The conversion of this
number to decimal gives:
Digits 1
A
Exponents 2
1
0
Values 1 * 162 A(10) * 161
= 1 * 256 10 * 16
= 256d
160d

Total
Hexadecimal is frequently used in digital forensics for ease of viewing raw
data. While it has been stressed on a number of occasions that raw data is
found only in binary format in an electronic storage system, this is not
necessarily the best way to view this raw data. The reason for this is
complexity. Consider the data shown in Figures 3.3 and 3.4. Figure 3.3
shows a binary representation of raw data, while Figure 3.4 shows the same
data in a hexadecimal form. While you may not yet fully understand binary
or hexadecimal I am certain you will agree that the hexadecimal data looks
a little easier to understand (if only for the reduced volume of data).
Figure 3.3 Raw binary data displayed using the xxd command.
Figure 3.4 Raw hexadecimal data displayed using the xxd command.
The reason that hexadecimal is so commonly encountered is due to the
relationship between binary and hexadecimal. Binary is a base 2 number
system while hexadecimal is base 16 or 
. This relationship means that
four bits can be represented with one hexadecimal digit and a byte can be
represented with two hexadecimal digits. In order to convert between the
two number systems values need only to be located in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4 Binary/hexadecimal conversion table.
Binary Hex Binary Hex Binary Hex Binary Hex
0000
0
0100
4
1000
8
1100
C
0001
1
0101
5
1001
9
1101
D
0010
2
0110
6
1010
A
1110
E
0011
3
0111
7
1011
B
1111
F
Consider the hexadecimal number 
. This can be converted to binary
using Table 3.4. Each individual hexadecimal digit is converted to the

corresponding binary value to give: 0b0001 1010 1110. The leading zeros
can be removed resulting in 0b1 1010 1110.
Reversing this process is just as easy. Binary digits can be grouped in fours
and replaced with the corresponding hexadecimal values. The grouping
process starts at the right‐hand side of the binary number. Consider the
binary number 0b1111000110. Grouping this from the right results in three
individual numbers: 11, 1100 and 0110. Converting these using Table 3.4
results in a hex value of 0x3C6.
3.2.5 Number Conversions
Using the place‐value system, a number in any base can be converted to
decimal. The final question to ask is how can a decimal number be
converted to another base? The easiest way to do this is through repeated
division. In repeated division the number to be converted is repeatedly
divided by the desired base. The remainders of this division process are
recorded which then result in the value. Consider the number 
. What
is the value of this in binary? The application of repeated division results in:
The repeated division process terminates when the result is 0. The
remainders are then read from bottom up to give the answer, in this case:
. The result of any number conversion can always be confirmed
by reversing the process. Converting 
 to decimal should result
in 
.

The same process is used to convert from decimal to hexadecimal. The
value is repeatedly divided by the base to which we wish to convert (
)
and the remainders are recorded. This process results in:
Reading the remainders from bottom to top gives 0x64. Again this result
can be confirmed by reversing the process!
3.2.6 Number Conversion with Bash
The Bash terminal can be used in a number of ways to perform number
conversions. One of the simplest means of converting any number to
decimal is through the use of the arithmetic substitution operator $((…)).
Listing 3.1 shows two methods of converting the number 
 to
decimal.
The base is specified as 16# (or 0x) followed immediately by the number to
be converted. The result is the decimal value of this hexadecimal number.
The same can be done for any base number in order to convert it to decimal.
For instance Listing 3.2 shows the conversion of 
 to decimal.
To convert from decimal to other number systems requires an external
program called bc. The use of bc is shown in Listing 3.3.

In Listing 3.3 the input (ibase) and output (obase) bases are specified in
advance. Finally the number, in the input base, is provided. All of this is
piped to bc which performs the conversion. Note that the default value for
bases, both input and output, is 10, so the command: echo “obase=16; 428”
bc would have the same effect as that shown in Listing 3.3. However, the
general format (i.e. specifying both input and output bases) can be used to
convert any pair of number system. Listing 3.4 shows a binary to
hexadecimal conversion, while Listing 3.5 shows a hexadecimal to base 5
conversion.

Figure 3.5 The in‐built calculator showing the conversion of a decimal
number.

Of course if an even easier way of converting between the standard number
systems is required the GUI's in‐built calculator can be used as shown in
Figure 3.5. The in‐built calculator in Linux Mint (shown in Figure 3.5)
allows for the selection of a Programming Mode. In this mode the user can
choose the input base (decimal is selected in Figure 3.5). Any value input
will be displayed in the three other number systems (the calculator supports
four number system bases, 2 (binary), 8 (octal), 10 (decimal) and 16
(hexadecimal)).
3.2.7 Negative Numbers
Up to this point only the natural (i.e. non‐negative integer) numbers and
their representation in computing systems have been examined. What about
negative non‐integer numbers? This section examines two's complement
one of the most common methods of representing negative integers.
Table 3.2 showed that an 8‐bit number can represent 
 (
) distinct
unsigned (positive) values. In an 8‐bit two's complement number the most
significant (left‐most) bit represents the sign. If the most significant bit is
zero then the number is positive, but if the most significant bit is one the
number is negative. In the case of a positive number the value is merely
calculated as it would be with an unsigned number; however, in the case of
a negative number extra steps must be performed. Given that the number
0xA7 is an 8‐bit signed two's complement number it is necessary to
calculate its value. To do this begin by converting the number to binary
resulting in 0b1010 0111.
From this the most significant bit is one, meaning that this is a negative
number. The inverse of each individual bit is then obtained and one is added
to the result. This value is known as the complement. This complement is
then converted to decimal to get the absolute value of the number. This
process is seen below:
Number:
0b10100111
Inverse:
0b01011000
Complement:
0b01011001
Absolute Value:

Decimal:
With two's complement numbers it is necessary to know the number of bits
used to represent the number in order to determine which is the most
significant bit that represents the sign of the number.
There are alternative means of representing negative numbers in computing
systems such as one's complement, sign‐and‐magnitude and offset binary.
However, while not the simplest, two's complement is the most commonly
encountered form. This is due to the ease with which mathematical
operations can be performed using two's complement numbers at the CPU
level.
3.2.8 Floating‐Point Numbers
Real numbers are another form of data that are sometimes required in
computing. The most common form of storage is as a floating‐point
number. In this, the decimal point can float; in other words, its position is
not set, but can move to allow for larger numbers to be expressed with a
lack of precision or to allow smaller numbers to be expressed with much
greater precision. To demonstrate this concept let us briefly look at the
decimal number system.
If 10 digits are permitted to represent a number then a choice must be made.
If the decimal point is placed after the eighth digit the numbers from 0 to
99,999,999, quite a substantial range, can be represented but the number's
precision is limited to two decimal places (
). If on the other hand the
decimal point is placed after the second digit the whole numbers 0–99, a
much smaller range, can be represented, but with eight places available
after the decimal for greater precision (
). This is the trade‐off made
when using a floating‐point number: either the number has a very large
range with limited precision or greater precision with less range.
Before introducing binary floating‐point numbers binary fixed‐point
numbers must be examined. Assume that a real number is represented using
a single byte in which the four most significant bits represent the whole
number part and the four least significant bits represent the fractional part
of the number. Consider a byte that contains 
, in reality this is
0110.
 as it is a fixed‐point number. Table 3.5 can be used to

calculate the value of this number. Note how similar the process is for a
fixed‐point number as it was for an integer. The place‐value system still
applies, but using different place values (some of the powers are now
negative!).
Table 3.5 Converting a fixed‐point binary number to decimal.
8
4
2
1
1/2
1/4
1/8
1/16
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
As with a standard binary integer the decimal value is obtained by
multiplying the final two rows in Table 3.5 and adding the results to give:
Hence the fixed‐point binary number 
 has the decimal value
.
As described earlier, fixed‐point numbers have limitations. For instance in
the single byte scheme shown above only 
 whole numbers (0–
) can
be represented, along with 
 fractional parts. If it was desired to represent
numbers such as 
 or 
 it is impossible to do so. With a
floating‐point numbering scheme both of these values can be represented.
In mathematics numbers are often represented in scientific notation such as
. This has the value 
. The number is divided into two
parts in this scientific notation: the first, 3.1, is called the mantissa (
),
while the second, 
, is the base (
) raised to the power of the
exponent (
). Generally all decimal numbers can be represented in the
form shown in Equation 3.1.

(3.1)
(3.2)
The principle is identical in binary. A real binary number can be represented
using the notation shown in Equation 3.2.
in which the only change is the base used for calculation purposes. Hence
floating‐point numbers consist of a combination of mantissa and exponent.
Consider an example in which the value 
 is to be stored in a
floating‐point format of 12 bits, in which one bit is reserved for the sign,
seven bits are reserved for the mantissa and four are used to store the
exponent. The fractional part of the mantissa itself is stored, while the
exponent is generally stored as a two's complement number. This is
represented as: 0110 1000 0011
The above binary floating‐point number can be converted to decimal using
the place‐value system as shown in Table 3.6. The most significant bit is
zero meaning that this number is positive.
Table 3.6 Calculating the value of the 12‐bit floating‐point binary number
.
Sign
Mantissa
Exponent
Value
1/2 1/4 1/8 1/16 1/32 1/64 1/128 8 4 2 1
Digit 0 (+) 1
1
0
1
0
0
0
0 0 1 1
From Table 3.6 the fractional part of the mantissa is determined to be
 (allowing for the omitted whole number component) which has
the decimal value 
. The decimal
value of the exponent is 
. Hence the decimal value of the floating‐point
number is given by:
The above floating‐point scheme is not a commonly encountered one. A
size (12 bits) was arbitrarily chosen. The most common format used in
computing systems to store floating‐point numbers is based on IEEE 754

(the latest version of which was released in 2019) which defines two
standards for floating‐point numbers, a 32‐bit single precision format and a
64‐bit double precision format. Each of these formats is divided into three
distinct parts, the sign, the mantissa and the exponent. Both the 32‐ and 64‐
bit formats use the most significant bit to represent the sign. The 32‐bit
format uses the next 8 bits to represent the biased exponent and the
remaining 23 bits for the fractional part of the mantissa. The 64‐bit format
uses 11 bits for the biased exponent and 52 bits for the fractional part of the
mantissa. Instead of the exponent, a biased exponent is stored. This bias
means that 
 must be subtracted from the biased exponent in order to
get the real value for the exponent. This allows for negative numbers even
though the exponent is unsigned. This is different to the simple scheme that
we proposed in which a signed value was used. Similarly the mantissa
generally excludes the leading 1, this is implied. In other words it is the
fractional component of the mantissa which is stored. This will be
demonstrated subsequently. Both formats use the exact same method to
store the data. For simplicity the 32‐bit format is used in this section.
An example of a 32‐bit floating‐point number is:
0100 0001 0101 1010 0000 0000 0000 0000b
Alternate fields are underlined in this example. From this it is clear that the
sign bit is zero meaning that this is a positive number. The exponent is
represented as 
 which is 
; however, this is a biased
exponent so 
 must be subtracted from this giving an exponent value
of 
. The mantissa is given as .101101; however, the leading 1 has been
omitted meaning that the mantissa value is 
. The mantissa
value is then shifted based on the exponent value (
) giving a final binary
value of 
 which can then be converted to decimal to get
.
Both IEEE 754 formats function in the same manner. However, there are
limitations in the representation of real numbers in a computer system. Only
those numbers that are considered ‘round’ in binary (i.e. those that are
composed of sums of 
, 
, 
, … – or more generally 
) can
be accurately represented in binary. For instance consider the number 
, this can't be represented in IEEE 754 format exactly. The closest

representations (for the 32‐bit format) are 
 and
. Hence, while computers are regarded as being wonderful
tools for performing mathematics, they do suffer from certain limitations.
These limitations are often based on how the underlying information is
represented.
3.3 Representing Text
Basic textual information is often of interest in investigation. How this is
represented can be of importance to the investigator in order to ensure that
their interpretation of the textual data is correct. Text is represented through
the use of character encodings. In computing these encodings generally
assign a number to each character. This number is then used to represent the
character. The earliest examples of character encoding existed before the
advent of the digital computing device. One of the most famous of these is
Morse Code in which combinations of short and long signals are used to
represent characters. These pre‐computing encodings often made no
distinction between upper and lower case letters, only providing a single
encoding for each letter. Computer‐based encoding schemes provide for
many, many more characters than did these pre‐computer encodings. This
section examines some of the more commonly encountered encodings
including ASCII, ISO‐8859 and unicode.
3.3.1 ASCII
The American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) was
developed originally in the 1960s. ASCII is a seven bit encoding scheme,
allowing for the possibility to represent a maximum of 128 (
) characters.
The ASCII scheme represents the English alphabet, numerals and
punctuation characters. In total there are 95 printable characters represented
in ASCII (52 of which are letters as both uppercase and lowercase letters
require different encodings). The remaining 33 characters are termed
control characters. These are non‐printing characters which originated with
the old teletype machines. Many of these control codes are now obsolete,
with only a small number being used regularly such as carriage return, line
feed and tab.

Each character is assigned a unique code. For instance the letter ‘b’ is
0b1100010 = 0d98 = 0x62. The ASCII table is shown in its entirety in Table
3.7.
Table 3.7 ASCII table.
0_
1_
2_ 3_ 4_ 5_ 6_ 7_
_0 NUL DLE sp. 0
@ P ‘
p
_1 SOH DC1 !
1
A Q a
q
_2 STX DC2 ”
2
B R b
r
_3 ETX DC3 #
3
C S c
s
_4 EOT DC4 $
4
D T d
t
_5 ENQ NAK % 5
E U e
u
_6 ACK SYN & 6
F V f
v
_7 BEL ETB ’
7
G W g
w
_8 BS
CAN (
8
H X h
x
_9 HT
EM
)
9
I
Y i
y
_A LF
SUB *
:
J
Z j
z
_B VT
ESC +
;
K [
k
{
_C FF
FS
,
< L ∖l
_D CR
GS
‐
= M ]
m }
_E SO
RS
.
> N ^
n
_F SI
US
/
?
O _
o
DEL
In order to use the ASCII table shown in Table 3.7 one merely needs to look
up the hex value in the table. Consider the ASCII value 0x5D. Find the cell
at the intersection of the column beginning with 5_ and the row ending with
_D. The value in this cell is the required character, ‘]’ in the case of 0x5D.
Listing 3.6 shows a sample of ASCII encoded text. It is possible to process
this using Table 3.7 to get the text ‘ASCII Encoding.∖n’. This text contains
two special characters. The first is 0x20 which represents a space, while the
second is 0x0A which represents a line feed.1

Each byte in Listing 3.6 is read individually and decoded (i.e. 0x41 is ‘A’,
0x53 is ‘S’, etc.). Note the final byte 0x0A, looking this up in Table 3.7
gives the LF control character. This is the Line Feed (newline) character.
Note that Linux systems by default use only 0x0A to represent a newline.
Windows/Dos‐based systems generally use two bytes to represent newlines,
Carriage Return and Line Feed, 0x0D0A.
3.3.2 ISO‐8859
ASCII is limited to the English language. Indeed some argue that ASCII is
limited to countries in which English is the main language and the dollar is
the currency! Examining Table 3.7 shows that there is only a single
currency symbol present in ASCII, the dollar ($). There are no pound (£) or
Euro (€) symbols meaning that ASCII cannot be used in English‐speaking
countries using these currencies.
Then consider non‐English languages. For instance in Irish the phrase ‘tá
Linux go hiontach’ means Linux is great but this phrase is not possible to
represent in ASCII (there is no á character). Furthermore the Irish language
contains é, ó, í and ú characters also, along with the corresponding
uppercase characters, Á, É, Ó, Í and Ú and of course that is only one extra
language. All languages must be considered.
Hence ASCII cannot be used to represent all Western European languages.
Indeed the situation becomes much worse moving further East, as different
alphabets such Cyrillic, Greek and Arabic are encountered.
The solution to this is to use the eighth bit in the byte to provide for more
characters (128 more to be precise) than that provided by ASCII. This was
originally known as Extended ASCII, the first 128 code points are identical
to that of ASCII and the extra 128 could be used for other characters.
Numerous extended ASCII encodings were devised for different countries,
tasks, etc. Finally the International Standards Organisation defined their
own extended ASCII standard, releasing this as ISO 8859.
There are a number of variants of ISO 8859. The first is called ISO 8859‐1
which contains the characters required to represent most Western European

languages. This is known as ISO Latin 1. In total there exist 15 ISO 8859
variants from ISO 8859‐1 to ISO 8859‐16 (ISO 8859‐12 was discontinued
during development and was never released, but the 8859‐12 designation
was never reused). Table 3.8 provides a summary of the ISO 8859 variants.
Note that in all of the ISO 8859 variants the first 128 characters are
identical to those of basic ASCII.

Table 3.8 ISO‐8859 variants.
Part
Name
Description
ISO‐
8859‐1
Latin‐1 Western
Europe
Western European languages including
English, Irish, Norwegian, German, Italian,
Portuguese and Spanish
ISO‐
8859‐2
Latin‐2 Central
Europe
Central and Eastern European languages
using the Latin alphabet, e.g. Bosnian, Polish,
Croatian, Czech and Slovak
ISO‐
8859‐3
Latin‐3 South
European
Turkish, Maltese and Esperanto (generally
replaced by 8859‐5).
ISO‐
8859‐4
Latin‐4 North
European
Estonian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Greenlandic
and Sami.
ISO‐
8859‐5
Latin/Cyrillic
Cyrillic alphabet languages, e.g. Belarusian,
Bulgarian and Russian.
ISO‐
8859‐6
Latin/Arabic
Arabic characters.
ISO‐
8859‐7
Latin/Greek
Modern Greek alphabet.
ISO‐
8859‐8
Latin/Hebrew
Modern Hebrew alphabet.
ISO‐
8859‐9
Latin‐5 Turkish
The same as Latin‐1 but some rarely used
characters are replaced by Turkish characters.
ISO‐
8859‐
10
Latin‐6 Nordic
Rearrangement of Latin‐4 for Nordic
languages. Baltic languages still use Latin‐4.
ISO‐
8859‐
11
Latin‐Thai
Thai alphabet characters.
ISO‐
8859‐
12
Latin/Devanagari
Work abandoned.
ISO‐
8859‐
Latin‐7 Basic Rim Extra characters for Baltic languages that
were not present in Latin 4/6.

Part
Name
Description
13
ISO‐
8859‐
14
Latin‐8 Celtic
Gaelic and Breton languages.
ISO‐
8859‐
15
Latin‐9
Provides full support for French, Finnish and
Estonian.
ISO‐
8859‐
16
Latin‐10 SE
Europe
Complete support for south eastern European
Latin alphabets.
The number of variants of ISO 8859 means that it is necessary to ensure the
correct encoding is being used before attempting to decode any textual data.
Consider the Irish message, ‘tá Linux go hiontach’, in particular consider
the first word tá. It is impossible to represent this word in ASCII as there is
no á. Hence one of the ISO 8859 variants (for instance ISO 8859‐1) must be
used. The code for á in ISO 8859‐1 is 0xE1. Table 3.9 summarises the
meaning of 0xE1 in all of the ISO 8859 encoding schemes.
Table 3.9 Interpretation of 0xE1 in all ISO‐8859 variants.
ISO‐8859‐1 á
ISO‐8859‐9
á
ISO‐8859‐2 á
ISO‐8859‐10 á
ISO‐8859‐3 á
ISO‐8859‐11
ISO‐8859‐4 á
ISO‐8859‐13 į
ISO‐8859‐5 c
ISO‐8859‐14 á
ISO‐8859‐6
ISO‐8859‐15 á
ISO‐8859‐7
ISO‐8859‐16 á
ISO‐8859‐8
Hence the word tá could be decoded in numerous different ways depending
on the variant of ISO 8859 that is being used. This is the reason
investigators must ensure they firstly determine the correct encoding before

attempting to decode text; otherwise, the result may be very different from
the original intended meaning.
3.3.3 Unicode
The ISO 8859 standard was introduced to overcome the 128 character
limitation of ASCII but it did not go far enough. The previous section
showed how ISO 8859 can be used to represent the European languages
(and a little further East). However, Oriental languages introduce further
difficulties. Consider the Chinese language, the Chart of Generally Utilised
Characters of Modern Chinese defines 7000 characters, while the Great
Compendium of Chinese characters defines 54,678 characters.2 Even the
lower of these two numbers is vastly greater than the 
 characters
available in any of the ISO‐8859 encodings. For Oriental languages the
ISO‐8859 system is not sufficient to represent the languages. Something
larger is required. This came about in the form of unicode.
The unicode encoding aims to combine all of the previous encodings and
add support for all languages, mathematics, emojis, etc. At the time of
writing there are almost 150,000 unicode code points defined. The
maximum number of possible unicode code points is 0x10FFFF (
). The initial version of unicode, released in October 1991,
defined a little over 
 characters. Unicode code points provide a
unique numeric identifier for each of the characters that are defined.
Regardless of the OS, language, etc., the unique identifier (also called the
code point) will be constant. This should have solved all of the problems of
communication encoding, but unfortunately it introduced another problem.
Listing 3.7 shows a possible encoding of the word Hello in unicode.
From Listing 3.7 we see an immediate problem in the unicode encoding
scheme, for many characters (all English alphabet characters, some
European alphabet characters, all punctuation, numbers, etc.) only one
single byte is required, but three bytes are being stored. The example in
Listing 3.7 requires 
 bytes of storage space, in which only 
 of these

are non‐zero. While storage space is not at the premium that it was in the
early days of computing, this is still a very inefficient use of space. To
alleviate this problem unicode transform functions were introduced. These
take the unicode code point and transform it in such a way that it
(generally) uses less storage space than merely using the code point. The
two most commonly encountered transform functions are UTF‐8
(commonly encountered on the web) and UTF‐16 (commonly encountered
in Microsoft products). The next two sections will examine these transform
functions in more detail. Other transform functions include UTF‐32 in
which every character is represented by four bytes! It is this inefficiency
that means that UTF‐32 is not very commonly encountered. Another
transform function is called UCS‐2 (Universal Coded Character Set) which
is a two byte encoding that can represent the first 
 unicode Code
Points. Again the inability to represent the entire code point range is the
main reason that UCS‐2 is no longer commonly encountered.
3.3.4 UTF‐8
UTF‐8 is a variable‐width character encoding scheme which transforms
unicode code points into values of one to four bytes in size. It is capable of
representing all 0x10FFFF possible unicode code points (CPs) and has
become the de facto standard for web page encoding. One of the benefits of
UTF‐8 is that the basic ASCII characters are represented in the same
manner in UTF‐8 as they are in ASCII – this is the reason that so much of
the web is considered to be in UTF‐8 encoding as it includes ASCII only
pages also.
Table 3.10 shows how unicode code points are encoded using UTF‐8. The
x's represent the bits in the actual unicode Code Point. A single byte can be
used to represent the first 
 characters (i.e. the ASCII characters). The
next 
 characters can be represented using two bytes and so on.
Probably the easiest way to explain Table 3.10 is through an example.
Consider the unicode code point 0xE1 (the á character) the following steps
show how this is represented in UTF‐8.

Table 3.10 UTF‐8 structure.
Max. CP
Length
Num.
Bytes
Byte 1
Byte 2
Byte 3
Byte 4
7 bits
1
0xxx
xxxx
11 bits
2
110x
xxxx
10xx
xxxx
16 bits
3
1110 xxxx 10xx
xxxx
10xx
xxxx
21 bits
4
1111 0xxx 10xx
xxxx
10xx
xxxx
10xx
xxxx
1. Convert 0xE1 to binary: 0b1110 0001.
2. The resulting binary value has 
 bits and therefore row 2 of Table
3.10 is required (maximum code point length is 
 bits whereas it is
only 
 bits on the first row).
3. Pad the binary value so that it contains the maximum bit length bits
(
 in this case) giving: 0b000 1110 0001.
4. Fit the padded binary value into the byte pattern specified in Table
3.10. This byte pattern is 110x xxxx 10xx xxxx. The x's are replaced
by the values in Step 3 giving: 0b1100 0011 1010 0001.
5. Convert the UTF‐8 encoded binary value to hexadecimal giving:
0xC3A1.
In order to get the unicode code point from a UTF‐8 encoded value the
above process is reversed. For instance if the UTF‐8 encoded value was:
0xC3B8 then the unicode Code Point would be found using the following
method:
1. Convert the UTF‐8 value to binary: 0b1100 0011 1011 1000.
2. From Table 3.10 the binary value fits the pattern in row 2: 0b1100
0011 1011 1000.

3. Remove the pattern bits giving: 0b000 1111 1000.
4. Remove the leading zeros giving: 0b1111 1000.
5. Convert to hexadecimal (0xF8) and look up in a Code Point table
giving the character: ø.
While knowledge of UTF‐8 encoded data is vital for any work on the web,
it is also the standard encoding used in most Linux versions (and many file
systems) and hence is vital for Linux Forensic Analysis.
3.3.5 UTF‐16
UTF‐16 is another transform function which, like UTF‐8, is capable of
representing all valid unicode code points. This uses one or two 16 bit (two
byte) code units to represent a character encoding. The first 
characters are trivial to represent, it is merely the two byte representation of
their unicode code point value.3 Consider the two characters demonstrated
in the previous section, á and ø, with code points, 0xE1 and 0xF8,
respectively, their UTF‐16 representations are 0x00E1 and 0x00F8,
respectively. Remember that UTF‐16 must use two or four bytes for
character representation.
But what happens in the case of a character in which the code point is
greater than two bytes in length (i.e. greater than 0xFFFF)? In this case two
16‐bit code units are used, which together are referred to as a surrogate pair.
In order to represent a code point such as 0x1F5A5 (a desktop computer)
the following method is used:
1. Subtract the value 0x10000 from the unicode Code Point (0x1F5A5)
0xF5A5.
2. Convert this to binary, 0b1111 0101 1010 0101, and pad to 20 bits if
needed: 0b0000 1111 0101 1010 0101.
3. Take the 10 most significant bits (0b00 0011 1101) and convert to
hexadecimal (0x3D) and add this to 0xD800 giving 0xD83D. This is
the first code unit, also known as the high surrogate (W1) which is
always in the range 0xD800–0xDBFF.

4. Take the 10 least significant bits (0b01 1010 0101) and convert this
to hexadecimal (0x1A5) and add this to 0xDC00 giving 0xDDA5. This
is the second code unit, also known as the low surrogate (W2) which is
always in the range (0xDC00–0xDFFF).
5. Combine the high and low surrogate (W1 and W2) to get the result:
0xD83D DDA5.
As with UTF‐8, if an already‐encoded UTF‐16 value is encountered the
above process is merely reversed. Consider the UTF‐16 encoding 0xD83C
DFC9, the following method is used to determine the code point:
1. Split the high and low surrogates to give 0xD83C (high) and
0xDFC9 (low).
2. Subtract 0xDC00 from the low surrogate to give 0x3C9 and convert
this to binary (10 bits) giving: 0b11 1100 1001.
3. Subtract 0xD800 from the high surrogate to give 0x3C and convert
this to binary (10 bits) giving 0b00 0011 1100.
4. Combine these values to give: 0b0000 1111 0011 1100 1001 and
convert to hex giving: 0xF3C9.
5. Add 0x10000 to 0xF3C9 to give 0x1F3C9 which is the unicode code
point for a rugby football.
While not directly relevant to every case (in the same way that UTF‐8 is
based on its penetration of web‐based text encoding) UTF‐16 is
encountered often in the Microsoft product family (and due to the
prevalence of Office documents in particular it can be encountered on any
OS), and as the default encoding used in some programming languages
such as Python (certain versions) and Java. Hence UTF‐16 data might be
encountered in any system under analysis.
3.4 Representing Time
Time is a fundamental concept in all investigation. On TV detectives are
seen trying to establish the time of death for a murder victim. They ask
suspects ‘where were you at midnight’? Traditionally time information was

obtained from clocks and watches, interpreted by people and provided to
law enforcement as part of a witness statement.
A computer system has a vast array of time data available to an investigator.
To process this information correctly a complete understanding of how time
is represented in a computer system is required along with the skills to
interpret this information.
When introducing the concept of bit fields the FAT Date and Time were
introduced. This is an older time representation system which is no longer
used in modern systems.4 Modern systems generally use epoch‐based time
values.
Epoch‐based systems are merely counters. They count in defined time
intervals from a particular point in time. In order to interpret them the epoch
from which the count begins (i.e. time zero) and the frequency of counts
(sometimes referred to as the granularity) must be known. Table 3.11
summarises some of the more common epoch‐based timestamp systems in
use in modern computing systems.
Table 3.11 Common epoch‐based time formats.
Time
Epoch
Granularity Notes
Windows/NTFS 01.01.1601
 s
Used in the Windows OS and
the NTFS file system. This is
one of the most commonly
encountered time formats in
digital forensics.
Unix Time
01.01.1970 1 s
Used in all Unix systems/file
systems. Encountered in some
browser artefacts and other
applications.
Web‐
kit/Chrome
01.01.1601
 s
Used in the Google Chrome
browser.
Mac/HFS+
Time
01.01.1904 1 s
Used in Apple's HFS+ file
system.
Unix time is commonly encountered in Unix/Linux systems (including file
systems) but also throughout the computing world, being also encountered

in some Apple file systems and some applications on other operating
systems. Hence the Unix time format will be covered in detail in the next
section.
3.4.1 Unix Time
As stated in Table 3.11 the Unix time is based on an epoch of 1 January
1970 at 00:00:00 UTC. This is time zero for Unix time. The counter is
advanced every second. Hence, in reality, Unix time measures the number
of seconds that have elapsed since 1 January 1970. Unix time is a UTC
time, the Unix time value is always stored as UTC. The OS will then apply
local settings to the UTC time to display it in the system's timezone.
From an investigative point of view the granularity of the basic Unix
timestamp is important. The counter is updated once every second. This
means that two operations which occur at the same second will have the
same timestamp. While this is not a major issue for files accessed directly
by a human user (humans can only open a small number of files in a 1 
second period) automated processes can access many files in a one second
timeframe. These actions cannot be ordered. Note that most modern
implementations of Unix Time include a nano‐second subcomponent to
allow for improved granularity. This can be seen in Listing 3.8.
Listing 3.8 shows the difference in the granularity of timestamps from an
older Linux filesystem (ext2) when compared with a newer file system
(ext4). In ext2 traditional Unix time values are used, meaning that the
granularity is one second. In ext4, there is an added nano‐second

component which the forensic tools also process. This means the order of
operations can be better determined in this file system.5
Unix time is traditionally stored as a 32‐bit signed quantity. This means that
the largest possible time that can be represented is 
. This value,
, represents a time of 2038‐01‐19 03:14:07 UTC. This is
the last possible time that can be represented by a traditional Unix
timestamp value. When the computer attempts to increase the counter it will
‘wrap around’ resulting in a time of 1901‐12‐13 20:45:52 UTC. This
problem is often called the Y2038 problem (and sometimes the
Epochalypse!). In recent years many systems are beginning to use a 64‐bit
signed integer to represent the Unix time value. This means that the largest
possible value is 
 which is 
.
This will not expire until 11 April 2262 at 23:47:16 (UTC). Safe to say that
I will certainly not be here to see the expiration of 64‐bit Unix time!
3.4.2 The Linux date Command
The Linux shell provides the date command to allow us to process Unix
epoch time values. Listing 3.9 shows the command to determine the current
Unix epoch time value.
Listing 3.10 shows how the date command is used to convert a unix
timestamp into a human‐readable format.
Notice in Listing 3.10 that the time is given in IST (Irish Summer Time).
This is applied by the OS using the current locale settings of the machine on
which the command is executed. Listing 3.11 shows the date command
being used to display the time value in UTC (being the exact data that is
stored on the file system).

During an investigation it is often necessary to display times in other
timezones. This can be achieved using TZ= as shown in Listing 3.12 where
the TZ=US/Eastern directive prior to the date command alters the
displayed timezone.
3.5 Endianness and Raw Data
This chapter has examined how data is represented in computer systems,
but the overall aim of this chapter is to allow for the interpretation of raw
data. While it is vital to understand how information is represented in ones
and zeros it is also necessary to understand how it is stored in computer
systems before being able to interpret data accurately.
Generally there are two methods used by computers to store information
either in a big‐ or little‐endian format. This endianness describes how the
information should be read. Consider the natural languages of English and
Arabic, English is read from left to right while Arabic is read from right to
left. These languages could be considered to have a different endianness.
In a big‐endian format the most significant byte is stored first, then the next
most significant and so on until the final least significant byte is reached. In
a little‐endian scheme the least significant byte is stored first, followed by
the second least significant and so on, all the way to the final byte which is
the most significant byte. In this chapter, up to this point, all data that we
have encountered has been in a big‐endian format.
Consider the number 
. When converted to hexadecimal this is
0xDAC0. This is automatically a big‐endian value. The byte 0xDA is the
most significant byte and is stored first, the byte 0xC0 is the least
significant and is stored last. If the storage method used was little‐endian

this would be reversed, meaning that in the raw data we would encounter
the values 0xC0DA. Now consider the value 
. In hex this
value is: 0x17D78400. This is a big‐endian value. Converting this to little‐
endian results in the following (note that spaces are added for clarity):
Big‐Endian
17 D7 84 00
Little‐Endian 00 84 D7 17
This is the final piece of information needed in order to interpret raw data.
Consider the hex dump shown in Listing 3.13. This shows the Master Boot
Record (MBR) partition table for a physical disk and the Linux command
used to extract this information. The partition table consists of four 16‐byte
entries, each of which is displayed on one line below.
However, like all raw data, without knowledge of the underlying structures
it is almost impossible to interpret this data. The structure for a partition
table entry is shown in Table 3.12. Note that all multi‐byte values are stored
in little‐endian format!

Table 3.12 Structure of the MBR partition table entry.
Offset Size Description
0x00
0x01 Bootable Status – 0x00 for non‐bootable partition, 0x80 for
bootable partition.
0x01
0x03 Cylinder‐head‐sector (CHS) of the first absolute sector in the
partition. This is an old form of addressing that has been
replaced by the logical address and size.
0x04
0x01 Partition Type Identifier – 0x07 is NTFS; 0x0B is FAT 32;
0x83 is Linux, etc. Complete lists of these codes are available
online.
0x05
0x03 CHS of the last absolute sector in the partition. This is an old
form of addressing that has been replaced by the logical
address and size.
0x08
0x04 Logical block address (LBA) of the first absolute sector in
the partition. This is the modern form of addressing which
should be used instead of the CHS addresses.
0x0C 0x04 Number of sectors in the partition.
Listing 3.14 shows the first partition table entry with alternate fields
underlined. These fields are based on the offset/size combination from
Table 3.12. For instance the LBA for the partition begins at offset 0x08 and
is 0x04 bytes in size. This means that the raw data stored at this point is:
0x0008 0000.
From Listing 3.14 it is clear that the partition is bootable (0x01 byte at
offset 0x00) and is of type 0x07 (0x01 byte at offset 0x04), in other words
an NTFS file system.6 The LBA starting address is given by 0x04 bytes at
offset 0x08, which has the value 0x0008 0000; however, this is little‐
endian, meaning that the least significant byte is stored first. This needs to
be converted to big endian before proceeding to convert to decimal.

Little‐Endian 00 08 00 00
Big‐Endian
00 00 08 00
This means that the actual LBA value is 0x800 or 
. A similar
process is performed for the size of the partition. This is found in the four
bytes at offset 0x0C which have the little‐endian value 0x00 20 03 00.
Converting this to big‐endian gives 0x00 03 20 00 which is 
sectors in size. Hence the partition table entry has been manually
interpreted, discovering that the partition begins at sector 
 and is
 sectors in size. This is the method used by file system forensic
tools when they read the partition table. Consider the output from a file
system forensic tool called mmls (which is covered in Chapter 4) shown in
Listing 3.15. Identical information is produced by that tool as the manual
interpretation of the data performed above.
3.6 Summary
This chapter has introduced the mathematical preliminaries that are
essential for digital forensics. It assumes that the reader is familiar with
these concepts and serves merely as a reminder. The basic data type in the
computer, and in electronic storage/transmission systems, is the bit. The
single binary digit can take the values zero or one, from which all of the
complex types that we encounter in the computer system are composed.
In terms of interpreting raw data it is generally most important that numeric,
textual and temporal data can be interpreted accurately. This is of special
importance in the Linux file systems where there are not necessarily tools
available for processing these. Hence it is sometimes necessary to perform
manual analysis as shown with the Master Boot Record Partition Table
Entries (Section 3.5). For instance only the ext Linux File System is

supported by any forensic tools but other file systems such as XFS, BtrFS
and ReiserFS are sometimes encountered on Linux systems. At the time of
writing there are no forensic tools that fully support these file systems.
Exercises
1. Convert the following numbers to decimal:
a. 0x4A
b. 0x1CD
c. 0b101101
d. 0b11001001
2. Convert the following numbers to binary:
a. 0x3D1
b. 0xBAD
c. 0d123
d. 0d42
3. Convert the following numbers to hexadecimal
a. 0b01011010
b. 0b1100011
c. 0d193
d. 0d72
4. What are the decimal values of the following 8‐bit two's complement
numbers?
a. 0b01101100
b. 0b11100100
c. 0b11001111
d. 0b10011000
5. The following hexadecimal sequences represent ASCII text. What are
their meanings?

a. 4865 6C6C 6F20 576F 726C 64
b. 4C69 6E75 7820 466F 7265 6E73 6963 730A
6. Encode the following unicode Code Points as (i) UTF‐8; (ii) UTF‐16
a. Code Point: 0x0398 – Greek Capital Letter Theta
b. Code Point: 0x1F3A7 – Headphone Emoji
c. Code Point: 0x1F415 – Dog Emoji
7. What characters are represented by the following big‐endian UTF‐8
encoded values?
a. 0xCE94
b. 0xE29A99
c. 0xF09FA68D
8. What characters are represented by the following big‐endian UTF‐16
encoded values?
a. 0x03A3
b. 0xD83CDF40
c. 0xD83CDF69
9. In Section 3.5 the first of four partition table entries were interpreted.
Interpret the three remaining partition table entries.
Bibliography
Carrier, B. (2005). File System Forensic Analysis. Boston, MA,
London:Addison‐Wesley.
Chalk, B.S., Carter, A., and Hind, R. (2017). Computer Organisation and
Architecture. Bloomsbury Publishing.
Goldberg, D. (1991). What every computer scientist should know about
floating‐point arithmetic. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 23 (1): 5–
48.

Harris, S.L. and Harris, D.M. (2016). Digital Design and Computer
Architecture. Amsterdam, Paris:Elsevier, Cop.
Hough, D.G. (2019). The IEEE Standard 754: one for the history books.
Computer 52 (12): 109–112.
IEEE STD 754‐2019 (2019). IEEE Standard for Floating‐Point Arithmetic.
IEEE Computer Society, pp. 1–84.
https://doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.2019.8766229.
International Standards Organization (1991). ISO/IEC 646:1991
Information Technology ‐ ISO 7‐Bit Coded Character Set for
Information Interchange. Geneva, Switzerland:International Standards
Organization.
International Standards Organization (1997). ISO/IEC 8859‐1 Information
Technology ‐ 8‐Bit Single Byte Coded Graphic Character Sets. Geneva,
Switzerland:International Standards Organization.
International Standards Organization (2020). ISO/IEC 10646:2020
Information Technology ‐ Universal Coded Character Sets, 6e. Geneva,
Switzerland:International Standards Organization.
Kahan, W. (1996). Lecture Notes on the Status of IEEE Standard 754 for
Binary Floating‐Point Arithmetic.
Knuth, D.E. (2014). Art of Computer Programming, vol. 2. Addison‐Wesley
Professional.
Muller, J.M. (2018). Handbook of Floating‐Point Arithmetic. Boston,
MA:Birkhäuser.
Negus, C. (2020). Linux Bible. Wiley & Sons Canada, Limited, John.
The Unicode Consortium (2023). Unicode 15.0.0 [Internet].
www.unicode.org. [cited 2023 January 14].
https://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode15.0.0/ (accessed 12 August
2024).

Notes
1 For those that remember the old typewriters, when the end of line was
reached, the drum was pushed back to the left. This caused two actions
to occur: the carriage returned to the left side of the page and the paper
moved on one line. For use with teletype machines both of these
characters were included in ASCII as 0x0D (carriage return) and 0x0A
(line feed). Either (or both) of these characters can now be used to
represent a new line in electronic text.
2 https://www.hutong-school.com/how-many-chinese-characters-are-there.
3 The code point values in the range 0xD800–0xDFFF are not representable
in UTF‐16, because these are used in the representation of code points
requiring more than two bytes. However, the code points 0xD800–
0xDFFF are not used as unicode Code Points (and never will be) due to
their use in the UTF‐16 encoding scheme.
4 This does not mean that knowledge of FAT Date and Time is no longer
required. While most modern systems no longer use this style of time
representation, the FAT file system is still very commonly encountered
in investigation. Many removable devices still use this system to store
time information. The latest file system for removable media, ExFAT,
also uses this system although it does include both millisecond and
timezone components.
5 You might also notice that there is a difference in the recorded
timestamps. Ext2 records Modification, Access and Inode Change times.
Ext4 records these three timestamps and also a Creation timestamp. Both
file systems also record a Deleted timestamp but this is only set if the
file has been deleted.
6 Note that in forensic analysis the value reported for file system type in the
partition table entry is not reliable. It is necessary to examine the
contents of the partition to determine the exact file system type.
OceanofPDF.com

4
Disks, Partitions and File Systems
The focus of this book is file system forensics – how information can be
recovered from a file system in a forensically sound manner. In order to
understand file system forensics it is necessary to first understand some
basic file system concepts. Knowledge of general file system concepts will
aid the understanding of file/metadata recovery in particular file systems.
Before it is possible to introduce these concepts it is first necessary to speak
about storage technology.
This chapter focuses initially on storage media, as it is upon a storage
medium that a file system will be found. Traditionally storage media
referred to rotational hard drives (and also floppy drives). Over the years
other forms of storage media have evolved. These have included optical
media (CDs, DVDs and Blu‐rays), and in more recent times flash media,
which is found in most modern USB devices. Currently the ultimate in
storage technology for the home market is the solid‐state drive (SSD).
Although often based on flash technology, SSDs add much more
functionality including parallel access, caching solutions and so on, to
greater increase the speed of the overall solution.
This chapter will then turn its focus to the logical aspects of storage media.
There are a number of layers of abstraction between the physical storage
medium and the end‐user. The user views a disk as a series of partitions,
logically contiguous areas, each of which appear as a single structure to the
end‐user. However, multiple partitions may exist on a single physical disk,
or indeed a single partition might occupy multiple physical disks. There are
numerous methods used to describe the partition layout on a device. During
the discussion on partitions two of the more common partitioning schemes
will be introduced, the master boot record (MBR) and the GUID Partition
Table (GPT). The analysis of these structures is generally the first step in
file system forensics. These structures tell where the partitions are located
on a physical device, and as such they inform the analyst of the potential
file system locations.

This chapter also describes the file system at a conceptual level, and also
describes the functionality that file systems can provide to users. It is
important to note that not all file systems provide all this functionality to
users as some file systems are less complex than others. It is important that
the analyst understands what potential information is available from the
particular file system under investigation.
The final topic in this chapter is that of analysis of file systems using Linux.
This is further broken into:
Acquisition (or imaging): How does the analyst gain access to the
data on the physical storage media in such a way that the digital
forensic principles (Section 1.3) are followed. This section discusses
some of the different forms of acquisition including logical and
physical acquisition (Section 4.4).
File System Forensics: Once an image has been acquired the file
system forensic analysis task can begin (Section 4.5). In this, the file
system contents (files/folders) are recovered along with their
associated metadata. Open source tools such as the Sleuth Kit (Section
4.5.1) are available to automate this process.
Data Carving: Occasionally file content exists in a disk image for
which no file system information is available. In this case the data
must be carved. This is achieved by searching for known file
signatures (those same values that the file command exploits – Section
2.4.2). One of the most effective tools for achieving data carving in
Linux is Photorec (Section 4.5.2).
4.1 Disk Storage
Computer storage mechanisms are classified into a four‐layer descending
hierarchy consisting of primary; secondary; tertiary; and offline storage
solutions. The lower the storage level, the longer it takes to access
information held on that device (latency) and the slower it is to transfer
information to/from the device (bandwidth). Primary storage has the best
bandwidth/latency, while offline storage has the worst.

Primary storage generally refers to random‐access memory (RAM). This
storage is volatile; hence, all information stored in RAM is lost when power
is removed. RAM is generally a form of semiconductor‐based memory.
Primary memory is the only form of memory that the central processing
unit (CPU) can access directly. RAM alone is not sufficient to start a
computer. Due to its volatility the start‐up instructions would be lost when
the computer is powered down. It would not be able to restart. Hence RAM
is combined with a non‐volatile primary memory area called read‐only
memory (ROM). This area maintains the information needed to start the
computer. There are two other forms of primary storage in common usage.
These are the processor cache and the processor's registers. Both of these
are also volatile.
From a file system forensic perspective, primary memory is of little interest.
While file system structures will exist on occasion in RAM (e.g. file
metadata) the file system as a whole will never be held in RAM. As most
primary memory is volatile (ROM is an exception, but generally ROM is
not re‐programmed by users and will contain only system boot information)
it is not examined during file system forensics. Instead if a running machine
is encountered it is analysed using live data forensics (LDF), one effect of
which will generally be to acquire a copy of the volatile primary storage.
The next level encountered in the hierarchy is that of secondary storage.
Secondary storage is not directly accessible from the CPU, some
intermediary must be involved in the communication. Secondary storage
access speed is much slower than that of primary storage1; however,
secondary storage is non‐volatile meaning that secondary storage retains
data even in the absence of power. The most common forms of secondary
storage in modern computer systems are hard disk drives (HDDs) and
SSDs. Certain secondary storage devices are removable. These include
optical media such as CDs/DVDs along with USB flash drives, floppy
disks, tapes, etc. These media are considered secondary when inserted in a
computer but considered offline when removed from the computer.
Tertiary storage is very infrequently encountered. Tertiary storage involves
a robotic mechanism which will mount and dismount archive storage
devices as needed. The devices in question are generally tape (although they
could use other storage technology). Tertiary storage is a form of

disconnected storage which can be re‐connected automatically when it is
needed.
The final category is that of offline storage mechanisms. As with tertiary
storage devices these are not immediately available to the computer. The
distinction is that offline storage devices require human intervention to
become online. Strictly speaking the USB Flash Drive is offline. There is no
way to bring it online automatically; the human must insert it. As stated
earlier, many offline storage devices can be considered secondary storage
when they are inserted into the computer.
In the remainder of this section the physical forms of secondary/offline disk
storage are briefly introduced. While the focus of this book is more towards
logical storage mechanisms (i.e. file systems) than the physical, it is
important to have an understanding of the physical side of the task as
certain physical devices provide some issues for digital forensics. The
section begins with the traditional rotational hard drive and also discusses
the other forms of rotational storage devices based on optical technology
such as CDs, DVDs and Blu‐ray storage (Section 4.1.1.1). These rotational
storage devices operate on a similar principle, the main difference being in
how information is stored/read, either magnetically or optically.
Modern storage devices generally use some form of flash storage (Section
4.1.2). The key difference between the traditional rotational storage
technologies and modern flash‐based storage devices is that there are no
moving parts in flash‐based storage devices. Flash storage technology is
found in most modern storage devices such as USB devices (often called
flash drives), SD cards and SSD. SSDs are discussed separately in this
chapter (Section 4.1.3) as, while they often use flash storage as their
underlying storage mechanism, they incorporate much more functionality
into the device, some of which has particular implications for digital
forensics.
4.1.1 Traditional Rotational Hard Drives
The traditional HDD is still commonly encountered in digital forensics.
Physically this device uses magnetic polarities to store data. Figure 4.1
shows a HDD with the cover removed. This shows the internal structure of
the HDD.

Figure 4.1 A traditional HDD with the cover removed showing the internal
structure.
The platters are the area of the HDD that store the magnetic charges. A
stack of these are mounted on a spindle. These platters rotate continuously
while the drive has power. Data is read/written by the read/write head. The
head actually consists of multiple heads between each of the platters.
Each platter is divided into a number of areas called tracks and sectors.
Tracks are circular paths that are found on both sides of the platter. Tracks
are the area of the platter which store information. The track can be seen in
Figure 4.2. Tracks are divided into a number of sectors. The file system
groups sectors into structures called clusters which are used as the logical
unit for storing data. Sectors in tracks nearer the outer rim of the platter are
physically larger than those nearing the centre; in reality they each contain
the same amount of information. The information density is higher in the
inner tracks than the outer tracks.

Figure 4.2 Platter structure showing the tracks, sectors and clusters.
As its name suggests the Read/Write Head is used to access information on
a HDD. Information is read/written one sector at a time. In order to read a
particular sector the read/write head aligns itself with the track on which the
sector is found. The platter is constantly rotating. The read/write head waits
for the platter to rotate so that the desired sector is correctly positioned.
Once this happens data can be read/written.
The mechanical nature of data access in a HDD means that it is a relatively
slow form of technology. There are two times to consider: the seek time and
the latency. The seek time is the amount of time that it takes for the
read/write head to be positioned correctly in relation to the desired track.
The latency (often called rotational latency) is the time taken for the desired
sector to rotate under the read/write head. This is one of the reasons that the

spindle speed (RPM) is very important in HDD technology. The faster the
platters rotate, the lower the latency and hence the faster that data can be
accessed overall.
4.1.1.1 Optical Media
Optical disks are another form of rotational data storage technology. These
include CD, DVD and Blu‐ray. These are traditionally used for offline
storage but have been replaced by USB devices in recent years.
Optical disks all have platters similar to those found in rotational HDDs.
Unlike the HDD these use optical rather than magnetic technology. Data is
encoded as a series of pits and lands on a platter. Pits are etched into the
reflective surface of the platter while lands are the flat areas that occur
between pits. Changes from pit to land (or vice versa) signify a bit value of
1, while no change, irrespective of whether pits or lands, signifies a bit
value of zero. Data storage (and access) generally uses lasers.
4.1.2 Flash Drives
Flash memory is a form of non‐volatile storage that, instead of being based
on mechanical devices, is based on electronic storage means. Flash memory
is a form of Electronically Erasable Programmable Read‐Only Memory
(EEPROM). Traditional EEPROM required the entire device to be erased in
order to rewrite information. This is not suitable for hard‐drives. If all
information from a hard‐drive needed to be erased in order to change one
byte it would be an inefficient process.2
Flash memory allows for the erasure of data from the device at the block (or
even byte) level. This means that updating a single byte requires the erasure
and rewriting of a single block (or byte) of data, rather than the entire
device.
Two types of flash memory are commonly used: NOR and NAND
memories. The distinction is based on the type of logical circuit used to
hold data. NAND‐based flash storage is the most commonly encountered in
investigation. This is found in phones, USB sticks and other small‐scale
devices.3 NOR‐based flash storage is generally more expensive and is
found in smaller devices such as device controllers for instance BIOS chips.

One of the key advantages of flash memory over traditional storage
technologies is that it is an electronic rather than mechanical storage
system. Platter‐based technology such as hard drives and optical disks
requires moving parts to read/write data. These mechanical components are
subject to physical damage. Electronic storage technologies are less at risk
of physical failures.4
4.1.3 Solid‐State Drives
SSD are another form of electronic non‐volatile storage. These are
generally based on interconnected flash memories. SSDs are much faster
than traditional HDDs as there are no moving parts. This means that there is
no time required to spin‐up the device and that there is very little latency in
seek operations. Also later in life HDDs tend to slow even further as more
files are heavily fragmented. This means that read/write operations take
longer. SSDs do not have an issue with fragmentation.
The nature of SSD storage leads to certain issues for digital forensics. SSD
components can only be written to a certain number of times before they
cease to function. Hence if a single area was written to too many times the
disk would deteriorate. To combat this the SSD controller implements a
technique called wear levelling. This will ensure that areas of disk are
written to a similar number of times. This will occasionally cause
information on disk to be moved by the controller independently of the OS.
The SSD controller also implements garbage collection. When the OS
marks information as unallocated, the SSD's TRIM function will erase that
area. This will allow for future information to be written back to the area of
the device but it does erase the contents of the deleted files. This means that
deleted files are less likely to be present on SSDs than on traditional HDDs.
SSDs also break one of the main principles of digital forensics, that no
changes should be made to evidence! As with HDDs, in order to acquire a
forensically sound copy of an SSD it must have power. However once
power is present the SSD controller's garbage collection routines are
running. This means that potentially data is changing on the device in
question. These issues need to be considered when analysing SSD devices.

4.2 Partitions
A partition (also called a volume) is a sequence of consecutive sectors on a
device. Each partition can be managed separately, even if all are present on
the same physical device. Partitions are created before any file system is
installed. The file system will be created inside a partition.
There are many reasons that partitions are used. Primarily they allow the
division of a single physical disk into multiple logical areas, each of which
can contain a particular file system. Partitions are used for a number of
reasons, firstly most modern computer systems have multiple partitions.
Generally Windows systems have a primary partition (which is mounted as
C: by default) and also a system restore partition, which contains
information necessary in the event of a complete system crash. The normal
user never interacts with this partition. The Linux OS often has multiple
partitions. This is done to separate data from operating‐system‐specific
areas. The OS can be upgraded or even completely replaced with no risk of
data loss. Secondly some users have multiple boot systems, for example
having both Windows and Linux on the same computer. Each of the
operating systems requires a separate partition. Windows systems need
NTFS to boot correctly, while Linux systems require one of the Linux file
systems (e.g. ext, BtrFS or XFS).
4.2.1 Creating Partitions/File Systems on Linux
In order to create a working file system there are two steps that need to be
completed. The first is to create a partition which will contain the file
system in question. This can be achieved in Linux using the fdisk and gdisk
commands (or graphical tools can also be used). The second step is to create
the desired file system. Note that this two‐step process occurs in every
operating system. It is often referred to as formatting or initialising. Most
modern operating systems hide the details of the process from the user. The
user will merely select a file system type with which to format the device
but the tool first partitions the device (if necessary) and then creates the file
system.
The remainder of this section will show how a USB device can be
partitioned on a Linux system and two file systems created. For the
purposes of this demonstration an ExFAT and ext2 file system will be

created. The first step after inserting the USB is to identify the newly
inserted device.
In Linux every device has a file in the /dev/ directory. Hard drives (and
USB drives) have the identifier sdX, where X is a, b, c, etc. The first
(primary) hard drive will be /dev/sda. In a system with a single hard drive if
a USB is inserted this will most likely be given the device identifier
/dev/sdb. However, it is not guaranteed. In order to be certain of the
identifier it is necessary to manually check the identifier. There are a
number of ways of discovering the identifier. Two of these include the
dmesg and lsblk commands.
Upon inserting a new USB device the actions are logged by the kernel. The
dmesg command allows access to this. Immediately after the insertion of a
USB key run dmesg and examine the final few lines. Listing 4.1 shows the
output from dmesg after inserting a USB device. The device identifier and
the partition list are underlined. From this it is clear that the device
identifier is /dev/sdb.
Another method of determining the device identifier is to use the lsblk
command. This will list all available block devices (e.g. disk drives). This
will include all of the devices on the system. Listing 4.2 shows the output
from the lsblk command on a machine. On this there are three devices

(/dev/sda – the primary hard drive; /dev/sdb – the inserted USB key; and
/dev/sr0 – the DVD drive).
Once the device identifier is determined it is possible to repartition the
device. As shown in Listings 4.1 and 4.2 the device was identified as
/dev/sdb. This is the identifier that will be used in the remainder of this
Section. Please ensure that you are using the correct identifier on your
system!
WARNING: The following steps will destroy all data on the device.
Also please ensure that you are referring to the device identifier that you
discover on your own machine. Do not just copy the commands here if
you are on a different device!
Generally new devices will be shipped with a single partition on the device.
Running the command sudo fdisk ‐l /dev/sdb5 will list the partitions
present on the device. Listing 4.3 shows the output of this command,
showing the single partition.

In order to create the new partition scheme the fdisk command is also used.
Running fdisk without the ‐l option will enter an interactive shell which can
be used to partition the device. There are a number of commands which are
of interest including:
d: delete a partition
p: print the current partition table
n: create a new partition
t: change the type of a partition. Note that entering L will list all
available partition types.
w: write the new partition table to disk
q: quit fdisk without writing any changes to the device
m: displays a help page
By deleting the existing partition and creating two new partitions it is
possible to create the structure shown in Listing 4.4.

At this stage the partitions have been created but there is no file system
present in them. Linux provides support for many file systems by default. In
order to create a file system one of the mkfs family of commands can be
used. Listing 4.5 shows an ExFAT file system being created in the first
partition (/dev/sdb1) and an EXT file system in the second partition
(/dev/sdb2).
Once file systems have been created it is necessary to mount these file
systems in order to use them.

4.2.1.1 Mounting File Systems on Linux
Linux provides the mount command which can be used to mount a file
system. For this to work it is necessary to first create a mount point for the
file system. This is merely a directory in the current file system. Before
proceeding you can examine the currently mounted file systems using the
df command. You might be surprised by the number that are present on a
Linux system!
Assuming that directories called fs1 and fs2 have already been created the
commands to mount the two file systems created previously are shown in
Listing 4.6. Once file systems have been mounted it is possible to use them
for file storage/retrieval. The remainder of this section will examine the
standard partitioning schemes in more detail.
4.2.2 Master Boot Record
One method of describing partition layout that is commonly encountered is
the MBR. The MBR resides on sector 0 of a storage device. It contains a
number of areas. The MBR contains some bootstrap code, a disk signature,
a partition table and an MBR signature. The boot code occupies the first
0x1B8 (
) bytes of data. This is followed by a 
 byte disk signature.
This signature should be unique to the system to which it is connected.
There are then two bytes of padding, which are followed by a 
 byte
partition table. The partition table itself is composed of four 
 byte
partition entries. Finally the MBR signature of 0xAA55 is found in the final
two bytes. Listing 4.7 shows the final 
 bytes of sector 0 in an MBR
formatted disk.

Table 4.1 shows the structure of the MBR partition table entry, while Table
4.2 shows the processed values from Listing 4.7.
Table 4.1 MBR partition table entry structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x01 Bootable
A value of 0x80 indicates the partition is
bootable; otherwise, it is not bootable.
0x01
0x03 Start Sector
(CHS)
A cylinder, head, sector address for the first
sector in the partition. This form of addressing
is no longer used.
0x04
0x01 Partition
Type
Partition‐type identifier. Some of the more
commonly encountered partition‐type identifiers
are listed in Table 4.3.
0x05
0x03 End Sector
(CHS)
A cylinder, head, sector address for the last
sector in the partition. This form of addressing
is no longer used.
0x08
0x04 Start Sector
(LBA)
The logical block address for the first sector in
the partition.
0x0C 0x04 # Sectors
The number of sectors in the partition.

Table 4.2 MBR partition table entry structure for Listing 4.7.
Offset Size Name
Entry 1
Entry 2
Entry 3
0x00
0x01 Bootable
0x00
0x00
0x00
0x01
0x03 Start Sector
(CHS)
0x00093C
0x33C55C
0x010100
0x04
0x01 Partition Type
0x83
0x83
0x83
0x05
0x03 End Sector
(CHS)
0x3C4679
0x648657
0x00203F
0x08
0x04 Start Sector
(LBA)
0x800
0x200800
0x400800
0x0C 0x04 # Sectors
0x200000
0x200000
0x200000
Table 4.3 Selection of values for the file system type in the MBR
partitioning 
scheme. 
The 
complete 
list 
is 
available 
at
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partition_type.
Value File System
Value File System
0x05 Extended partition 0x07 ExFAT/NTFS/HPFS
0x0B FAT32
0x83 Linux file system
Table 4.3 provides a small sample of the commonly encountered MBR
partition types. The values in this table cover the major file systems in this
book. One of these to note is that of the extended partition (0x05). The
primary MBR partition table can only hold four partitions; however, there is
a special type of extended partition which can also be used. Figure 4.3
shows an MBR‐partitioned disk with five partitions, three primary
partitions and one extended partition containing two logical partitions. The
primary and extended partition table structures are also marked.

Figure 4.3 A disk with five partitions created using a primary MBR and an
extended boot record (EBR).
Table 4.2 shows the processed values from the partition table in Listing 4.7.
As expected there are three partitions listed in this. All three partitions have
the bootable flag set to 0x00, meaning that these partitions are not bootable.
Similarly all three have the partition type as Linux (0x83). One of the key
things with partitions in the MBR scheme is that they are addressed in two
different ways. In one case they use Cylinder, Header, Sector (CHS)
addressing. This is a physical address based on the actual disk geometry
(hence the references to cylinders, heads and sectors). In the other case they
use logical addressing. It is this logical addressing that is used most
frequently in modern computer systems (and in all digital forensic tools).
The partition's location can be found using the logical block address (LBA)
of the starting sector of the partition along with the number of sectors in the
partition. In each of the cases in Table 4.2 the partitions occupy 
sectors with starting addresses of 
, 
 and 
,
respectively.
Listing 4.8 shows the output from the mmls command when run on the
device containing the partition table in Listing 4.7. Compare this to the
processed values in Table 4.2 to confirm the information is correct. Note
that the mmls tool does not list the CHS addresses.

4.2.3 GUID Partition Table
The MBR scheme does not scale well to modern devices. The logical
address limit in MBR is four bytes. As each logical address is generally a
 byte sector this equates to a 2 TiB file system size limit. There are
now devices capable of storing much greater volumes of data than 2TiB and
as such MBR was no longer sufficient. The replacement structure is known
as the GPT and is found in most modern devices (although MBR is still
very frequently encountered). With standard sector size (
 bytes), if it
is necessary to have a partition of more than 2 TiB then GPT must be used.
Figure 4.4 shows the structure of a device that has been partitioned using
the GPT scheme. The first sector of the device contains a protective MBR.
This generally contains one single partition which is as large as possible (up
to the device size or the MBR partition size limit). This protective MBR
will prevent older operating systems, which do not support GPT, from
determining that there is no file system present and reinitialising the device.

Figure 4.4 GPT‐partitioned device structure.
The GPT structure itself is duplicated. The protective MBR is immediately
followed by the primary GPT structure. This is a 33 sector structure. The
first structure contains the Primary GPT header which provides information

about the device as a whole. The structure of this is shown in Table 4.4.
This is followed by 
 sectors, each of which contains four 
 byte
partition table entries. Comparing GPT to MBR shows that there is now
more space available to store information about each partition (
 bytes
as opposed to 
 bytes) and also that there are many more partitions that
can be used (
 as opposed to 
). The structure of the GPT partition
table entry is shown in Table 4.5.
Table 4.4 GPT header structure.
Offset Size
Name
Description
0x00
0x08
Signature
Signature with value EFI PART.
0x08
0x04
Revision
Revision number generally 0x100.
0x0C 0x04
Header Size
The header size in bytes (Generally 0x5C).
0x10
0x04
CRC32
(Header)
CRC32 checksum for the header.
0x14
0x04
Reserved
Must be zero.
0x18
0x08
Current LBA Location of this header sector.
0x20
0x08
Backup LBA Location of the other header sector.
0x28
0x08
First Usable
LBA
Location of the first sector available for
partitions.
0x30
0x08
Last Usable
LBA
Location of the last sector available for
partitions.
0x38
0x10
Disk GUID
Mixed‐endian disk GUID.
0x48
0x08
LBA of First
Entry
The location of the first partition table entry
(0x02 in primary GPT structure).
0x50
0x04
Num Entries
The number of partition table entries.
0x54
0x04
Entry Size
The size of the partition table entries in
bytes (generally 0x80).
0x58
0x04
CRC32
(Entries)
CRC32 checksum values for the partition
entries.
0x5C 0x1A4 Reserved
Must be zero for the remainder of this sector.

Table 4.5 GPT partition entry structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x10 Partition‐Type
GUID
Mixed‐endian GUID representing the file
system type.
0x10
0x10 Partition GUID A unique mixed‐endian GUID representing
the partition itself.
0x20
0x08 First LBA
The starting sector for the partition.
0x28
0x08 Last LBA
The final sector in the partition. Note this
sector is included in the partition.
0x30
0x08 Attributes
Partition attributes. See Table 4.7.
0x38
0x48 Name
36 UTF‐16 characters for the partition name.
GPT's advantage over MBR is immediately clear when examining Table 4.5
which shows the addressable space. GPT uses an 
 byte structure to store
addresses. This means that 
 sectors can be addressed. Compare this to
MBR which uses only a 
 byte address field (allowing for 
 sectors).
Assuming a default sector size of 
 bytes, this means that MBR can
utilise disks of up to 
 bytes (i.e. 2 TiB) whereas GPT can utilise disks of
up to 
 bytes (i.e. 8 ZiB).
The GPT scheme also provides some identifying information which is not
present in MBR. This includes a Globally Unique Identifier (GUID) to
identify the partition. The GUID6 is a 
 bit identifier that is almost
guaranteed to be unique.7 UUIDs are generally displayed using an 8‐4‐4‐4‐
12 format as shown in Listing 4.9.
In this structure the M bit represents the UUID version. There are five valid
versions (1–5) at the time of writing. The differing versions are related to
how the UUID is generated. This might include using current time and Mac
Address (Version 1), an identifier, time and Mac Address (Version 2), name
and namespace identifier (Versions 3 and 5) and random numbers (Version

4). The variant is represented by 1–3 most significant bits in N in Listing
4.9. The possible values are:
Variant 0 (
)
Variant 1 (
)
Variant 2 (
)
Variant 0 is now obsolete. While in textual form Variants 1 and 2 are
identical (except for the contents of the variant byte) their storage is
different. Variant 1 UUID's use big‐endian byte ordering for all fields, while
Variant 2 UUID's use little‐endian byte ordering for the first three fields (8‐
4‐4) and big‐endian byte ordering for the remaining fields (4‐12).
In addition to the partition's GUID there is also a GUID to represent the file
system type. This is of the same structure as the partition GUID but only a
limited number of values are allowed. These values summarise the file
system type in the respective partition. Some of the more common values
for this GUID are given in Table 4.6.8
Table 4.6 A selection of commonly encountered partition‐type GUID
values.
OS
Partition Type
GUID – Big Endian
Windows Microsoft
Reserved
E3C9E316‐0B5C‐4DB8‐817D‐
F92DF00215AE
Basic Data
Partition
EBD0A0A2‐B9E5‐4433‐87C0‐
68B6B72699C7
Linux
Linux File System 0FC63DAF‐8483‐4772‐8E79‐
3D69D8477DE4
Swap Partition
0657FD6D‐A4AB‐43C4‐84E5‐
0933C84B4F4F
MacOS
HFS+
48465300‐0000‐11AA‐AA11‐
00306543ECAC
APFS Container
7C3457EF‐0000‐11AA‐AA11‐
00306543ECAC

The final extra functionality provided by the GPT partition scheme is the
allowance of 
 bits to store attributes. 
 bits are general while the
remaining 
 can be used by individual file systems. Table 4.7 shows the
general attribute meanings while Table 4.8 shows the Microsoft Basic Data
Partition specific bit values.
Table 4.7 General attribute values in GPT.
Bit
Meaning
Platform required – disk partitioning utilities must preserve this
partition.
EFI Firmware should ignore this partition.
Legacy BIOS Bootable.
–
Reserved.
–
Defined by individual partition types.
Table 4.8 Attribute values specific to the Microsoft Basic Data Partition.
Bit
Meaning
Read only
Shadow copy
Hidden
No drive letter (do not automount)
4.3 File Systems
Techopedia defines a file system as ‘a process that manages how and where
data on a storage disk, typically a hard disk drive is stored, accessed and
managed’. Brian Carrier states that ‘computers need a method for the long‐
term storage and retrieval of data’ which is achieved through the file
system. The file system is a set of structures that manage how file content is
stored on electronic storage media. They provide a means by which a user
can organise data in a hierarchy of files and directories.

4.3.1 File System Concepts
This section introduces the general concepts which are common to many
file systems. Understanding these concepts is essential in order to
effectively analyse file systems. These concepts include:
Sector: A sector is the basic unit of disk storage. On the majority of
devices sectors are 
 bytes in size but there are certain devices
which have a larger size. Read/write operations on disk are generally
conducted at the sector level. In terms of file system forensics the
sector number or Logical Block Address (LBA) is used to locate
structures on disk.
Cluster/Block: A cluster (sometimes called a block) is a collection of
sectors. This is the basic unit of storage in the file system. Files occupy
clusters (or parts thereof). Consider a case in which a file system uses
eight sectors in each cluster. This results in a cluster size of 
bytes. A file consisting of one single byte will occupy a single cluster.
The single byte file will be of size 
 byte but have an allocated size
of 
 bytes; in other words, it occupies one cluster.
File: Files are containers for storing information in a computer/file
system. Files occupy a number of clusters/blocks in the file system.
File systems also contain metadata about each file.
Directory: Directories are used to organise files/directories in a
hierarchical structure. File systems often treat directories as special
files, in which their content is a list of files/directories that are
contained in the directory.
Metadata: Metadata is data about data. It is information that the file
system maintains about each file/directory that is present on the file
system. Metadata is often as important as file content during file
system forensic analysis.
Storage Mechanisms: In the majority of file systems the metadata
allows for the content to be located. This can be achieved in a number
of ways. In older file systems such as FAT and ext every cluster/block
in the file system is listed. More modern file systems generally allow
for extent‐based storage. In this the file content location is described

through a structure called an extent. This structure contains the starting
cluster for the file's content along with the number of clusters in the
extent. This is a more efficient way to store information about many
contiguous clusters, rather than listing them all. In some file systems
the content of small files may be stored in the metadata structure itself.
This is known as inline storage.
File Deletion: When using a standard operating system to view a file
system, deleted files do not appear but the content and metadata of
these files are often still present in the file system. Many file systems
do not actually delete a file; instead, they mark the metadata structure
as being deleted. The OS does not show these deleted files but file
system forensic tools will show them. The deleted file will eventually
be overwritten as the clusters occupied by that file (and the metadata
structures) are marked as available and can be used for something else
in the future.
File Fragmentation: File fragmentation occurs when there is no
single area in the file system large enough to store the entire contents
of a file. The file is then split into a number of pieces each of which is
stored individually. These pieces are known as fragments.
Unallocated Space: Unallocated space is space in a file system that is
not currently in use. It is marked as unallocated in the allocation map.
When a file is deleted the clusters which contain the file's content are
marked as unallocated in the allocation bitmap, meaning they become
part of unallocated space; however, the file content is still present.
Copying files from a file system will not include unallocated space;
hence, in digital forensics a bit‐by‐bit image of the device is created, to
ensure that unallocated space is also analysed.
Slack Space: While the cluster is the basic storage unit in a file
system, files do not necessarily occupy entire clusters. Consider the
situation mentioned previously, a file of one single byte occupies a
cluster of 
 bytes. The remaining 
 bytes in the cluster is
the slack space. This may contain data from previous files that
occupied this cluster.
Figure 4.5 shows an example of this. Figure 4.5(A) shows a sequence
of three clusters containing the content of a single file. If this file is

deleted and another file which occupies a little more than two clusters
is written to its place we see that the third cluster still retains some of
the data from the first file (Figure 4.5(B)). This is the slack space.
Figure 4.5 Demonstrating slack space. (A) A file that occupies three
clusters on the file system. (B) This area after the original file is
deleted and a new, shorter, file is written into its place. It is clear that
part of the content of the original file is still present.
Trees: Most modern file systems use Trees as the basic storage
mechanism. Generally these are self‐balancing trees which allow for
quick searches. Trees are composed of nodes of three types: Root
node, internal (or index) nodes and leaf nodes. There are a number of
types of tree that are encountered in file systems. Some use B‐Trees in
which all leaf nodes are at the same level but data may be found in
interior nodes also. Others use B+Trees in which data is only found in
leaf nodes. Figure 4.6 shows an example B+‐Tree for a directory
structure. The directory contains 
 files all consisting of numbered
names. These appear in the leaf nodes.

Figure 4.6 A sample B‐Tree structure.
Trees are quick structures to search as they are well organised.
Consider the case of searching for the file called 
 in the
directory structure in Figure 4.6. The root node value is 
, the
desired value is 
 which is greater than the root node value;
hence, the desired file must be in the right child. The right child is an
internal node. It contains pointers to three leaf nodes, one whose
values are less than 
, one whose values are 
–
,
and one whose values are greater than 
. The desired node,
 is less than 
 and hence the left child is followed. This
leads to a leaf node in which the desired file is found.
Copy on Write: Copy‐on‐write (CoW) is a policy used in many
modern file systems in which a copy of a resource is created when the
original is modified. This means that the original is often still present
on the file system. CoW is used to ensure integrity of the file system
but it also gives the potential to discover earlier versions of artefacts.
Volume Boot Record: Most file systems have a Volume Boot Record
(VBR) structure.9 This structure provides information about the file
system as a whole. This might include labels (i.e. names),
sector/cluster sizes, file system size and locations of important file
system structures.
Allocation Maps: The file system keeps track of all structures that it
controls. These structures could be clusters, metadata structures, etc.
To do this most file systems use allocation maps (also called bitmaps).
These structures generally use a single bit to represent a single entity.

A value of 
 shows that the structure is currently in use, while a
value of 
 shows the structure is unused.
Journal: Many modern file systems maintain a journal structure. The
journal records changes to the file system before they are committed to
the disk. In the event of a file system crash the journal can be used to
quickly repair the file system. Most journals record only changes to
metadata, not to actual content. From a forensic perspective journals
provide the potential to see changes in the file system over time.
Snapshot: A snapshot is a view of a file system at a particular point in
time. Many modern file systems allow for snapshots to be created.
This is generally achieved through copy‐on‐write. These snapshots are
used as a backup mechanism and can therefore show the investigator
older versions of the file system.
RAID: A Redundant Array of Independent10 Disks allows for multiple
disks to be combined to form a single file system. This new file system
can merely be used to create one single large file system (combining
all drives in the array) or it can be used for redundancy purposes.
Many modern file systems implement RAID in the file system itself.11
There are a number of different RAID levels. Some of the more
commonly encountered levels include: RAID 0 which is used to
combine a series of disks into one large disk. There is no redundancy
(although there are benefits to performance). RAID 1 is perfect
mirroring. Data is written to two or more drives, giving a perfect back
up solution. RAID 5 allows for full redundancy. A drive can fail in
RAID 5 and the contents can still be retrieved from the other drives.
RAID 5 requires at least three disks.
These concepts are present in many file systems. Simpler file systems, such
as FAT, will not have many of the more advanced concepts. For instance the
FAT file system does not support RAID, it has no journal, it does not use B‐
Trees and so forth. However, modern file systems are more likely to support
all (or most) of these concepts.

4.3.2 Comparison of File Systems
There are a large number of file systems in use today, from the traditional
disk‐based file systems such as FAT and EXT to fault‐tolerant systems such
as BtrFS and ReFS. There are also distributed file systems, file systems for
particular device types and so forth but only a small number of these file
systems are encountered frequently in digital forensics.
The file systems that are of most interest to analysts are those that are
encountered on the main operating systems (Windows, MacOS and Linux – 
which includes Android). The majority of file systems encountered will be
traditional disk‐based file systems which are commonly supported by the
main operating systems.
For this reason this book will focus on the following file systems from
Windows: FAT,12 ExFAT and NTFS; from Linux: Ext,13 XFS and BtrFS;
and from MacOS: HFS+ and APFS. In this section the capabilities of each
of these file systems are discussed and compared.

Table 4.9 Comparison of the most common file systems.
File
System
Year Max.
Volume
Size
Max.
File Size
Max. Filename
Length
Filename
Encoding
NTFS
1993
 PiB
 PiB
UTF‐16
EXT2
1993
 TiB
 TiB
ASCII
XFS
1994
 EiB
 EiB
ASCII
FAT 32
1996
 TiB
 GB
UCS‐2
HFS+
1998
 EiB
 EiB
UTF‐16
EXT3
2001
 TiB
 TiB
ASCII
ExFAT
2006
 PiB
PiB
UTF‐16
EXT4
2008
 EiB
 TiB
ASCII
Btrfs
2009
 EiB
 EiB
Unicode/ASCII
APFS
2017
 blocksa)
 EiB
UTF‐8
a) Assuming default block size of 
 bytes this would mean that the maximum volume size is 
ZiB.
From Table 4.9 it is clear that as time has moved on, the capacity of file
systems has increased. This is due in the main to the increasing capacity of
hard drives. The early FAT 12 file system could handle only a volume of
, tiny by today's standards. The newest file systems measure their
capacities in yobibytes (
 bytes).
There are some caveats to Table 4.9, for instance the filename length for all
FAT file systems is given as 8.3. This refers to the 11 bytes allocated for the
name, 8 of which were used for the filename and 3 for the extension.
However, most variants of FAT now include support for Long File Names
which provide for up 255 characters in a UTF‐16 encoding. It should also
be noted that the figures are based on the maximum cluster sizes, the limits
might be smaller in practice.

One of the most important aspects in criminal investigation is that of time.
Time can be used to support or refute a suspect's alibi. Hence it is important
to understand the time values that are present in each file system. Table 4.10
shows the timestamps that are present in each of the file systems.
Table 4.10 Timestamp availability in the common file systems.
Granularity Modified Accessed Change Creation Other
NTFSa)
 s
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
EXT2b) 1 s
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Deletion
XFS
 s
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
FAT 32 2 s
Yes
Yesc)
No
Yes
No
HFS+d) 1 s
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Backup
EXT3b) 1 s
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Deletion
ExFAT
 s
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
EXT4b)
 s
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Deletion
Btrfs
 s
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
APFSe)
 s
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
a) NTFS stores times related to both file content and filename.
b) The ext2, 3 and 4 superblock contains last mount, last write and last checked times.
c) FAT32 only stores the access date not the time.
d) HFS+ stores the file system creation, modification, backup and checked timestamps in the volume
header.
e) APFS stores the last modified and last unmounted times in the volume superblock.
In relation to timestamps trends are also obvious. Modern file systems are
recording timestamps with much better granularity. This is generally at the
nanosecond level. Older file systems, designed for older and slower
computers, did not require this level of exactness.
4.4 Acquisition of File System Data
Before file system forensic analysis can begin a disk image is required.
While physically possible to run all file system forensic tools on an actual

disk, any inadvertent change made to the content might invalidate all
results. Hence an image of the device is acquired. In this section the types
of image are described. The section then proceeds to distinguish between
logical and physical acquisition. This section then describes how a Linux
workstation can be configured for acquisition, ensuring that no file systems
are automatically mounted before acquisition is performed. Finally some of
the Linux tools that are available for performing acquisition are introduced.
4.4.1 Logical vs Physical Acquisition
Acquisition can either be logical or physical. In a physical acquisition every
bit on the device is captured. This includes not only live files, but also slack
space, deleted files, unallocated space, etc. This type of acquisition is the
preferred method of acquisition in all cases as no potential evidence is lost.
However, physical acquisition is not always possible. Sometimes there is no
choice but to perform a logical acquisition.
In a logical acquisition live files, in other words those that are addressed
through metadata structures and are not marked as deleted, are acquired. In
certain types of device (such as some smart phones) this is the only form of
acquisition that is possible. With acquisition in LDF this might also be the
only form of acquisition that is possible. Consider the scenario in which a
running machine contains an open encrypted container. If the machine is
shutdown in order to physically acquire the device then this encrypted
information will be lost, unless a key is present. Hence a logical acquisition
would be performed at the scene, copying all files from the encrypted
container. This, of course, will result in only live files being acquired. As
this book focuses on file system forensics it is necessary to use physical
acquisition. A logical acquisition would not result in the collection of file
system structures. Hence, for the remainder of this section it is assumed that
the reader is interested only in physical acquisition.
4.4.2 Acquisition Under Linux
Many readers may already have access to a forensic workstation which is
used to acquire disk images. For those that do not have access to a
workstation this section provides a brief overview of the steps in setting up
a workstation using Linux.

The key point in relation to acquisition is to remember the first ACPO
principle, that actions performed by the investigator may not change the
underlying data. Consider the insertion of a USB key into any standard
computer. The computer attempts to be helpful and mounts the device and
displays the contents. This process can (and often does) change the content
on the device. Now consider if this USB device was a piece of potential
evidence. The simple act of plugging it into the workstation has potentially
altered the content.
To combat this, best practice recommends that a write blocker be employed.
These are usually hardware devices that stop all write signals being sent to
the device. If no hardware write blocker is available it is possible in Linux
to disable automount. In Linux Mint this is achieved through the file
manager application.14 In the Nemo file manager select Edit  Preferences.
On the behavior tab find media handling and ensure that all boxes are
unticked. This is shown in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7 Media handling preferences in nemo file explorer when
automount is disabled.
In order to acquire an image of a physical device it is necessary to discover
the device identifier. This can be done in the same manner as shown in
Section 4.2 either using dmesg or lsblk.
4.4.2.1 The dd Family
dd is a Linux command line utility which allows an image file to be
created. Once the device has been inserted into the workstation and the
identifier discovered it is a simple process to image the device using the dd
command. For instance, Listings 4.1 and 4.2 show a device identifier of
/dev/sdb. The command sudo dd if=/dev/sdb of=device.dd will take
/dev/sdb as input file and create an image in the local file device.dd. The

dd command can also be used to image a partition as shown in Listing 4.10
in which /dev/sdb1 is imaged.
From Listing 4.10 there is a discrepancy between the number of records and
the number of bytes. By performing a simple calculation each record must
consist of 
 bytes. This is the default block size at which dd operates.
The dd command's block size can be changed using bs=. Generally
increasing the block size achieves the same end result as that in Listing 4.10
but results in fewer read/write operations and therefore quicker acquisition.
The starting position and the number of bytes to extract can be specified in
addition to the block size. Imagine that the analyst wishes to extract the
MBR from /dev/sdb. The MBR occupies the first sector on the device.
Hence the block size should be 
 bytes (to match the sector size),
acquisition should begin at the beginning of the device (the MBR appears at
the very start of the device) and only a single sector should be acquired. In
this case both the block size and starting point default values (
 and
, respectively, are acceptable); however, the number of blocks to be
extracted must be specified. Listing 4.11 shows how this is achieved.
In Listing 4.11 only one single block is acquired. This is achieved through
the count= option. count=1 means that only one single block (
 bytes)
is extracted. What if only the partition table itself was required? The
partition begins at byte offset 
 and is 
 bytes in size. In this case it
is impossible to use a block size of 
 bytes (it is too large for the

desired amount of information). Instead the block size is set to 
 byte, the
count to 
 bytes (as it is desired to extract 
 bytes), and finally a
parameter called skip is given the value 
. This will commence the
acquisition at byte offset 
, reading 
 single byte blocks. This is
shown in Listing 4.12.
While permitting forensic acquisition the dd tool is not a forensic tool. For
instance it does not allow for the verification of the captured data.
Generally, the analyst would need to image the device and then calculate a
hash over the device and over the image to ensure that the imaging process
worked correctly. This process is shown in Listing 4.13.
There are two common variants of dd that are used for forensics. Both are
based on the original dd and as such support most of the options that have
been examined previously. These are dc3dd and dcfldd. Both of these
allow for hashing, logging and splitting images, etc. Both of these tools can
be installed from the standard repositories.

4.4.2.2 Expert Witness Format (EWF)
The basic dd command creates a raw image, a bit‐by‐bit copy of the input
device. Hence if a 1TiB hard drive is imaged the resulting file is also 1TiB
in size. This can quickly lead to storage issues. The Expert Witness Format
is the image format used in tools such as EnCase and is available for all
major operating systems. On Linux Mint it can be installed using: sudo apt
install ewf‐tools. This package provides a number of commands related to
EWF images including:
ewfacquire: This command is used to image a device and create an
EWF image.
ewfinfo: The EWF format stores information about the image file in
the image file itself. This command is used to view this information.
ewfverify: The EWF format stores information about hash values of
the original data and the image. This command can be run to verify
that the contents of the image file are still intact.
ewfexport: This is used to convert the EWF format to another format
(e.g. raw).
ewfmount: This is used to mount the EWF image. The mounting
process creates a raw image in memory which can then be mounted as
normal.
The above commands are generally self‐explanatory. For instance if
imaging a device with ewfacquire the user will be asked a series of
questions related to the case and the image. Generally the default values for
the image will be acceptable (the user might wish to specify best
compression in order to reduce the image file size).
One command that needs a little extra information provided is that of
ewfmount. All files supplied from this book's website are in EWF format.
In order to view the hex values of these raw image files there are two
options. The image can be exported to a raw format using ewfexport or it
can be mounted which will create a raw format in memory. Listing 4.14
shows the command for mounting an image file called FAT32_V1.E01 on a
directory called mnt.

After mounting the image file the contents of the mount point directory
contain the file ewf1. This is the raw image which can then be further
analysed.
4.4.2.3 guymager
guymager is a graphical disk imaging tool which can support multiple
formats. On Linux Mint it can be installed using: sudo apt install
guymager. This tool can be executed from the command line using sudo
guymager. Root access is required as this tool is meant to access physical
disks in order to acquire an image. Figure 4.8 shows a screen shot from the
guymager application.
Figure 4.8 The guymager application showing two connected disks.
Right‐clicking on any device in guymager will allow the device to be
acquired either in raw format (similar to dd) or in EWF format (similar to
ewfacquire). guymager will also create documentation for the EWF image

format. The GUI allows the user to input information such as case number
and evidence number.
4.5 Analysis of File Systems
File system forensics generally involves five steps which are:
Determine the partition layout;
determine the file system type;
list files in the file system;
recover file metadata; and
recover file content.
All digital forensic tools perform these actions. In most commercial tools an
evidence item (generally a disk image) is loaded into the system and
processing begins. Very quickly the analyst will see the various partitions
that are on the image and also the types of file system that are contained
within these partitions.
The next step performed by the tools is to provide a list of all files (and
their associated directory structure) that are present in each of the file
systems. These file system forensic tools not only provide the live files, in
other words, those that would be seen if the file system was mounted, they
also provide the deleted files where possible.
Once the digital forensic tool has listed the contents of the file system it
begins to process each file (sometimes the tool will do this only at the
explicit request of the user). This will gather the metadata for the particular
file and also the file's content.
The above method is used by all file system forensic tools during their
execution. In the next section the Sleuth Kit, a set of command line tools
which can perform the above tasks, is introduced. As each individual file
system is analysed in the remainder of this book it will be shown manually
how forensic tools perform the above five steps.

4.5.1 The Sleuth Kit
The Sleuth Kit (TSK) provides a set of command‐line utilities to perform
all of the required digital forensic analysis steps. Additionally Sleuth Kit
provides other helper commands. This section introduces the Sleuth Kit
commands. Sleuth Kit was created by Brian Carrier and has become one of
the most widely used file system forensic analysis toolsets in academia.
There are a number of reasons for this. First and foremost the software is
free! There are no licensing costs associated with Sleuth Kit. From an
educational perspective, the use of the command line is better than using
commercial, graphical tools. Operating at the lower, command line, level
will allow investigators to better understand the individual steps that are
taken by commercial forensic tools. Hence Sleuth Kit is a great introduction
to the methods used by all commercial forensic tools.
The remainder of this section will demonstrate the use of the Sleuth Kit
using one of the file systems available from this book's website. In this case
the file FAT32_V2.E01 is used.
As this is an EWF image file, prior to analysis the file must be mounted.
Assuming that a directory called mnt exists in the current directory, this is
achieved using the command shown in Listing 4.15.
4.5.1.1 Determine the Partition Layout
The Sleuth Kit's mmls command was previously introduced to show the
partition layout in a device. While there are a number of Linux tools such as
fdisk and gdisk that can be used to show a file system, mmls is specifically
designed for use in file system forensics. This means that unlike the OS
tools, the mmls command will not only display actual partitions but will
also provide information about unallocated space that exists on the drive.
Listing 4.8 shows the output from the mmls command. Note that mmls will

not function on the disk image contained in FAT32_V2.E01 as this image is
of a partition, not of an actual disk. This means that this image contains no
partition table. If the reader wishes to see mmls in action it can be run on
the local hard drive using: sudo mmls /dev/sda.
4.5.1.2 Determine the File System Type
Sleuth Kit's fsstat tool reads the contents of the partition and checks if it
follows the format of any known file system. Because fsstat (and many
other Sleuth Kit tools) work on a file system, many of these tools require an
offset to the beginning of the partition to be specified using the ‐o option. In
the case of FAT32_V2.E01 this is not necessary as the image is of only a
partition. Listing 4.16 shows the output from fsstat on FAT32_V2.E01.
As can be seen this is a FAT32 file system. If you continue through the
output of the fsstat command you will see that much information is
provided about the file system itself. This includes the layout of the various
structures (e.g. Boot Sector, FAT 1 and FAT 2, Data Area and Root
Directory), device information (sector/cluster size, etc.), and, if files are
present the sectors/clusters that are occupied by files. The meaning of this
output will be made clear in Chapter 5.
4.5.1.3 List the Files
The basic command for listing files in the file system is fls. In the same
manner that fsstat is a file system tool, fls is also a file system tool and as
such it must be provided with the offset at which the partition starts. The

command to list the files in the FAT32_V2.E01 file is given in Listing 4.17.
Remember that in this particular case no offset is necessary.
Sleuth Kit tools differ from traditional file system tools in that not only do
they list the live files, they also list the deleted files, and even list the file
system structures. The final four entries in the output in Listing 4.17 are file
system structures: $MBR, $FAT1 and $FAT2. The $OrphanFiles directory is
a location used by Sleuth Kit to list deleted files in the file system for which
no parent directory can found. These files cannot be placed in the file
system hierarchy so are placed in this directory instead.
By default the fls command lists only those files in the root directory. In
order to list all files the command must be made recursive. This is achieved
using ‐r, the effect of which is shown in Listing 4.18.
Examine the underlined entries in Listing 4.18. Files represents a directory
(denoted by d/d) while delete.txt represents a file (denoted by r/r). The

delete.txt entry is inside the Files directory (denoted by the + symbol). The
delete.txt file is also deleted (denoted by *). Each of the items has a unique
identifying number associated with it (Files is 5 and delete.txt is 134). How
these numbers are determined is dependent on the file system in question.
By default when Sleuth Kit is run it lists the contents of the root directory.
However running a command such as: fls mnt/ewf1 5 will list the contents
of the Files directory. There are many further options for fls which can be
discovered in the man pages.
4.5.1.4 Recover File Metadata
Metadata can be recovered using Sleuth Kit's istat command. The istat
command requires the offset to the start of the file system and also the
metadata address of the item in question. The output from istat is dependent
on the file system in question.
Listing 4.19 shows the istat command required to view metadata for the file
delete.txt on FAT32_V2.E01. The output has been truncated for
presentation purposes.
4.5.1.5 Recover File Content
The final task that is necessary is that of file content recovery. Sleuth Kit
provides the icat command to achieve this. The syntax is identical to that of
istat, an offset is specified (if required), along with the metadata address.

Listing 4.20 shows the recovery of delete.txt. Notice how the output is
redirected to a local file.
4.5.1.6 Other TSK Commands
Sleuth Kit provides other helpful commands for file system forensics. These
include the ability to generate timelines, to extract unallocated space and to
automate certain recovery tasks.
Timelines are often of vital importance in file system forensics. Sleuth Kit
provides the mactime command which can be used to create a timeline
which can be viewed in any spreadsheet application. This is achieved using:
fls ‐m '/' mnt/ewf1 | mactime ‐b ‐ ‐d > timeline.csv. The ‐m option for fls
causes Sleuth Kit to create a body file, with each file/directory name being
prefixed by /. This can then be read by the mactime command using ‐b ‐ to
specify that the body file should be taken from STDIN (‐). The use of ‐d
causes mactime to output in a format where dates can be used directly in a
spreadsheet, thereby improving the analysis potential.
The blkls command is used to extract all unallocated sectors from an image.
These sectors are not part of any file system structure; however, they may
contain old files/metadata structures which may be of interest.
Finally Sleuth Kit provides a command to automate file recovery. The icat
command used on all files would be very inefficient. TSK provides the
tsk_recover command which, by default, will recover all deleted files in
the file system. Listing 4.21 shows this command being used firstly to
recover deleted files (and store them in a directory called recovered), and
secondly using the ‐e option to recover all files.

Throughout the remainder of this book TSK will be used to confirm the
results of manual analysis of those file systems that are supported by the
tool. Sleuth Kit currently supports FAT (Chapter 5), ExFAT (Chapter 6),
NTFS (Chapter 7), EXT (Chapters 8 and 9) and HFS+ (Chapter 12). Sleuth
Kit version 4.11 (the current version at the time of writing) does not support
the remaining file systems in this book.
4.5.2 Data Carving
File system forensics is the most effective means of recovering data from an
electronic storage device. The main reason for this is that it recovers both
the file's content and its metadata. However, in certain circumstances the
file's metadata has been overwritten but the actual content is still present on
the device. The lack of metadata means that the file's content can no longer
be located using file system forensic tools. However, a technique called data
carving may still work.
Carving exploits the structure of certain file types, searching the disk for the
particular signatures of each type of file. Consider a JPEG file, the first and
last bytes of which are shown in Listing 4.22.
The signature value for JPEG files is two‐fold. Every JPEG starts with the
hex values 0xFFD815 and ends with the hex values 0xFFD9. Data carving
algorithms work by scanning the disk looking for these starting signatures.
Once a signature, such as 0xFFD8 is located, the carving system will read

forward from that point until it encounters an 0xFFD9 value signifying the
potential end of the file's contents.
Data carving is not a fully reliable technique as it results in a certain
number of false‐positive results. For instance it is possible to locate the hex
values 0xFFD8 which are not the start of a valid JPEG file but merely
random data.
Rather than searching every single byte on a drive for starting signatures,
carving algorithms tend to look at sector boundaries. All file systems use
the cluster (or block) as the basic storage units. The start of a file will
always appear at the beginning of a cluster. While it might not be possible
to determine the cluster size on a device on which carving is being
performed, in all file system clusters are formed from a number of sectors.
Hence examining every sector boundary for signatures is normally the
preferred method. This greatly improves the efficiency of carving
algorithms and limits the number of false positives.
Certain carving tools will take certain file system knowledge into account.
For instance the ext family of file systems are further broken into block
groups, each of which acts as a mini‐file system (Chapter 8). Some carving
tools (e.g. photorec) can exploit this structure and as such will attempt to
determine if the underlying file system might be ext.
Common open source carving tools include photorec, scalpel and
foremost. All of these can be installed from the standard Linux
repositories.16 Generally all digital forensic software suites can perform
data carving.
4.6 Summary
This chapter examined some of the basic concepts that are necessary for file
system forensics. In order to process a file system it is necessary to know
how data is organised on disk. This organisation is both physical and
logical. Physically information can be stored using magnetic charge, surface
pits or electrical charge. Information can be accessed through magnetic or
optical readers involving spinning platters or electronically in the case of
modern storage devices.

However, the logical organisation is more important for file system
forensics. This includes the partitioning structures on disk and also the file
system itself. This governs how information can be located on disk and
maps the logical and physical addresses, allowing forensic tools to recover
information.
Subsequent sections of this book will examine actual file systems in detail.
The remainder of this book is divided into three main parts covering
Windows, Linux and Apple file systems.
Exercises
1. Both mmls and fdisk/gdisk display the partition table contents. In
your opinion which of these is the best tool to use for digital forensics?
Justify your opinion.
2. What challenges will the increased use of solid‐state drives (SSDs)
have for digital forensics?
3. Physical acquisition is considered best practice in digital forensics. In
what situations would logical acquisition be considered?
Bibliography
Akbal, E., Yakut, Ö.F., Dogan, S. et al. (2021). A digital forensics approach
for lost secondary partition analysis using master boot record structured
hard disk drives. Sakarya University Journal of Computer and
Information Sciences 4 (3): 326–346.
Al, S.G. (2016). Analyzing master boot record for forensic investigations.
International Journal of Applied Information Systems 10: 22–26.
Alherbawi, N., Shukur, Z., and Sulaiman, R. (2016). A survey on data
carving in digital forensic. Asian Journal of Information Technology 15
(24): 5137–5144.
Arpaci‐Dusseau, R.H. (2018). Operating Systems: Three Easy Pieces.
Scott's Valley, CA:Createspace https://pages.cs.wisc.edu/remzi/OSTEP/.

Carrier, B. (2005). File System Forensic Analysis. Boston, MA;
London:Addison‐Wesley.
Dani, A., Mangade, S., Nimbalkar, P., and Shirwadkar, H. (2024). Next4:
Snapshots in Ext4 File System. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.06790.
Davis, K., Peabody, B., and Leach, P. (2024). RFC 9562: Universally
Unique IDentifiers (UUIDs). https://doi.org/10.17487/RFC9562.
Jeong, D. and Lee, S. (2019). Forensic signature for tracking storage
devices: analysis of UEFI firmware image, disk signature and windows
artifacts. Digital Investigation 29: 21–27.
Kasampalis, S. (2010). Copy on write based file systems performance
analysis and implementation. M.Sc Dissertation. Technical University of
Denmark, 94p.
Nelius, J. (2020). What's the difference between flash and SSD storage? PC
Gamer. https://www.pcgamer.com/whats-the-difference-between-flash-
and-ssd-storage/ (accessed 12 August 2024).
Nikkel, B.J. (2009). Forensic analysis of GPT disks and GUID partition
tables. Digital Investigation 6 (1–2): 39–47.
Nikkel, B. (2016). Practical Forensic Imaging: Securing Digital Evidence
with Linux Tools. San Francisco, CA:No Starch Press.
Rodeh, O., Bacik, J., and Mason, C. (2013). BTRFS: The Linux B‐tree
filesystem. ACM Transactions on Storage 9 (3): 1–32.
Seppanen, E., O'Keefe, M.T., and Lilja, D.J. (2010). High performance
solid state storage under Linux. In: IEEE 26th Symposium on Mass
Storage Systems and Technologies (MSST), 1–12. Lake Tahoe,
Nevada:IEEE.
Techopedia.com (2019). What is a File System? ‐ Definition from
Techopedia [Internet]. Techopedia.com.
https://www.techopedia.com/definition/5510/file-system (accessed 12
August 2024).

Vieyra, J., Scanlon, M., and Le‐Khac, N.A. (2018). Solid state drive
forensics: where do we stand? In: Digital Forensics and Cyber Crime:
10th International EAI Conference, ICDF2C 2018 (10–12 September
2018) Proceedings 10 2019, 149–164. New Orleans, LA, USA: Springer
International Publishing.
Yang, X.X. (2013). Programming for I/O and storage. In: Software
Engineering for Embedded Systems, 817–877. Elsevier B.V.
Notes
1 Primary storage speeds are generally measured in nanoseconds while
secondary storage speeds are measured in milliseconds.
2 Not to mention the problem of where the information would be stored
before it was written back to the device.
3 It is also generally found in SSDs along with more advanced controllers.
4 The lack of moving parts also means that they are much quieter than
traditional mechanical storage technologies.
5 The gdisk command can also be used to list partitions on a device.
Strictly speaking fdisk is for use with MBR partitioning schemes while
gdisk is for use with GPT partitioning schemes. The differences in these
schemes are introduced later in this chapter.
6 The more general term for GUID is UUID (Universally Unique
Identifier), Microsoft systems tend to use GUID rather than UUID.
7 Uniqueness is not enforced; however, probability dictates that the chance
of a non‐unique value is so low that we can declare these to be unique.
8 For a complete list of these file system type values see:
https://linux.org/attachments/guid_partition_table-pdf.5814/ – Page 8.
9 This is sometimes called the Boot Sector, the Superblock, etc.
10 Originally this was Inexpensive; however, later papers preferred
Independent.

11 There are also hardware RAID solutions in existence but these are not
the focus of this book. In the case of hardware RAID, the file system
appears to exist in a traditional disk, the hardware controller handles all
RAID matters. In File System RAID, it is the file system itself that
controls the RAID system. This is the focus of this book.
12 There are multiple versions of the FAT file system: FAT12; FAT16; and
FAT32.
13 There are multiple versions of Ext (2, 3 and 4).
14 The method of disabling automount might be different in different
distributions, and even in different versions of Linux Mint. It is essential
that testing is carried out to ensure that automount has been successfully
disabled before any evidential material is inserted into the workstation.
15 The signature is actually more complex than this. The subsequent bytes
distinguish the exact JPEG version used but every JPEG signature
begins with 0xFFD8.
16 Note that photorec is available as part of the testdisk package on Linux
systems.
OceanofPDF.com

Part II
Windows File Systems
OceanofPDF.com

5
The FAT File System
The File Allocation Table file system, or FAT as it is more commonly
known, is an old file system that still finds regular use today. The file
system was named for its main organisational unit, which is also called the
File Allocation Table. The original version of the FAT file system was
developed for floppy disks in 1977. Since this time there have been three
major versions of FAT: FAT12, FAT16 and FAT32. There have also been a
number of minor variants of most of the main FAT versions. The versions
differ mainly in the size of addressable space available. There are 
addresses in FAT12, 
 in FAT16 and 
 in FAT32.
FAT was commonly encountered on removable media (i.e. USB devices,
cameras, etc.) and as such the file system is supported by default on all
major operating systems. In recent years the ExFAT file system1 is
beginning to replace FAT as the standard on removable media but the FAT
file system is still in common usage (embedded devices, UEFI boot
systems, older removable media, etc.).
FAT was the traditional Windows file system before the advent of NTFS
(Chapter 7). While NTFS was first released in 1993 and very soon became
standard on the Windows NT family of operating systems, it was only in
2001, with the release of Windows XP, that NTFS became the standard file
system on home PCs.
Traditionally FAT filenames were in the 8.3 format. That is, an eight‐letter
filename, followed by a three‐letter extension. With the advent of long file
names (LFNs), which could be overlaid on all FAT variants, filenames were
limited to a much larger 
 characters. The file system records the
creation and modification dates and times and the access date by default.
No access time or metadata change date or times are recorded.
Throughout this chapter the FAT32 variant is discussed but all variants are
very similar in structure. The ability to analyse one will allow the analyst to

very quickly analyse any of the variants. FAT32 is chosen as the target in
this chapter as it is the most likely variant to be encountered.
5.1 On‐Disk Structures
In this section some of the important on‐disk structures in the FAT file
system are analysed. The section begins with an overview of the
organisation of a FAT formatted volume and what structures are expected to
appear. Each of these structures is then discussed in more detail in the
subsequent sections. It should be noted at this point that, unless stated
otherwise, all data in the FAT file system is stored in little‐endian format.
5.1.1 Layout
The FAT file system contains three main areas of interest which are
summarised in Figure 5.1. The reserved area contains file system
information (FSINFO). In FAT12 and FAT16 this area generally occupies
only a single sector (although this should be confirmed prior to analysis). In
FAT32 this area contains more information and consequently is always
larger.
Figure 5.1 The layout of the FAT file system.
The reserved area in all variants of FAT contains a volume boot record
(VBR) in sector 0 (Section 5.1.2). In FAT32 this is generally followed by a
FSINFO structure (Section 5.1.3). FAT32 also often contains a backup of
these structures. This means that the FAT32 reserved area is generally much
larger than that of FAT12 and FAT16.
Following the reserved area the FAT table itself is found. Generally there
are two copies of this table as it is of such great importance in the FAT file
system. The FAT tables allow the file content to be recovered from disk and
also allow empty clusters to be identified when allocating space for new
files.

The final area of the FAT file system is that of the data area. In this area all
files/directories are found. Traditionally (i.e. FAT12 and FAT16) the
beginning of the data area always contains the root directory structure from
which the contents of the entire file system can be listed. In FAT32 the root
directory is no longer guaranteed to appear at the very beginning of the data
area; instead, it can be found anywhere inside the data area. Its location is
found in the VBR (although it is still commonly found at the beginning of
the data area).
5.1.2 Volume Boot Record
The VBR, also called the boot sector, is contained in sector 0 of the volume.
This structure contains information about the file system as a whole. The
Sleuth Kit tool, fsstat, extensively consults this structure in order to gather
information about the file system. Tables 5.1 and 5.2 provide information
about this structure. Table 5.1 provides information about the first 
bytes in the VBR which are common to all FAT file system variants. Table
5.2 contains information about the subsequent bytes in the structure as
found in a FAT32 volume. The bytes at offset 
 and 
 (i.e. the
final two bytes in sector 0) must always have the values 0x55 and 0xAA,
respectively. This is identical to the final two bytes in the master boot
record (MBR) sector.

Table 5.1 Common FAT VBR structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x03 Jump
Instruction to jump to boot code.
0x03
0x08 OEM Name
The OEM Name (ASCII). This is also called
the volume label.
0x0B 0x02 Sector Size
The size of each sector in bytes (must be
power of 2 between 
 and 
).
0x0D 0x01 Cluster Size
The number of sectors in each cluster.
0x0E
0x02 Reserved
Area
The size of the reserved area in sectors.
0x10
0x01 # FATs
The number of File Allocation Table (FAT)
structures present in the file system.
0x11
0x02 Max. # Files
The maximum number of files allowed in the
root directory in FAT12/FAT16. This value is
generally 0x00 in FAT32.
0x13
0x02 # Sectors
The total number of sectors in the file system
if less than 
. If larger than 
 sectors the
four bytes at 0x20 are used instead and this
value is zero.
0x15
0x01 Media Type
0xF8 for a fixed disk, 0xF0 for a removable
disk.
0x16
0x02 FAT Size
In FAT12 and FAT16 this contains the size of
each FAT structure in sectors. In FAT32 this
field has a value of 0x00.
0x18
0x02 Sectors/Track The number of sectors/track on the storage
device.
0x1A 0x02 # Heads
The number of heads on the underlying
storage device.
0x1C 0x04 Sector Offset The offset in sectors to the start of this file
system on the device.
0x20
0x04 # Sectors
The total number of sectors on the device.
Used if the two bytes at offset 0x13 are not

Offset Size Name
Description
large enough to store the value. Only one of
these fields will ever be used the other will be
zero.
Table 5.2 Extended FAT VBR structure (FAT32).
Offset Size Name
Description
0x24
0x04 FAT Size
The size of each FAT structure in sectors.
0x28
0x02 FAT Write Describes how the FAT structures are written. If
bit 7 is set then only one structure is active (bits
0–3 describe which FAT is active); otherwise, all
FATS are mirrored.
0x2A 0x02 Version
The major/minor version numbers.
0x2C 0x04 Root
Directory
The first cluster of the root directory structure.
0x30
0x02 FSINFO
Sector
The sector at which the FSINFO structure is
found. This is typically immediately after the
VBR.
0x32
0x02 VBR
Backup
The sector at which the backup copy of the VBR
is found (typically 0x06).
0x34
0x0C Reserved
Zero'd.
0x40
0x01 OS
Specific
OS‐specific field related to booting.
0x41
0x01 Unused
Unused, typically 0x00.
0x42
0x01 Signature
Signature value of 0x29, if set the next three
fields are valid.
0x43
0x04 Serial
Number
Volume serial number.
0x47
0x0B Volume
Label
The Volume Label in ASCII.
0x52
0x08 FS Type
The file system type (e.g. FAT32 – but nothing is
required in this field).

Processing the VBR allows all other structures to be located. For instance
the FSINFO structure and the VBR backup are located directly from the
primary VBR. FAT 0 begins after the reserved area and its size is
determined from the VBR. This is followed by FAT 1 which is the same
size as FAT 0. FAT 1 is followed by the data area. The root directory's
starting cluster is also located in the VBR. Later the conversion of cluster to
physical byte offset is shown (Section 5.1.7).
5.1.3 File System Information (FSINFO)
The FSINFO structure is an optional structure in FAT32, the location of
which is found in the VBR itself. This structure is used to optimise space
allocation for new files. The structure of FSINFO is provided in Table 5.3.
As its purpose is space allocation the information contained in this structure
is mainly related to free clusters on the device. From a file system forensics
perspective the FSINFO structure is not of vital importance.
Table 5.3 The FSINFO structure.
Offset Size
Name
Description
0x00
0x04
Signature
0x41615252.
0x04
0x1E0 Unused
Unused.
0x1E4 0x04
Signature
0x61417272.
0x1E8 0x04
# Free Clusters
The number of free clusters on the
device.
0x1EC 0x04
Next Free
Cluster
The next free cluster on the device.
0x1F0 0x0C Unused
Unused.
0x1FC 0x04
Signature
End of sector signature (0xAA550000).
5.1.4 File Allocation Table
The File Allocation Table (FAT) is of such vital importance to the FAT file
system that the file system was named after this structure. The File
Allocation Table serves two purposes. Firstly it acts as an allocation bitmap
(although it uses more than a single bit per cluster) to allow efficient
discovery of a cluster's allocation status. Secondly it allows the next

allocated cluster in a file/directory to be located. The starting cluster of a
file/directory is located in the directory entry (Section 5.1.5) while
subsequent clusters are found in the FAT structures.
Due to its importance there are typically two FAT structures present in most
FAT file systems (although this should always be confirmed in the VBR).
Each cluster is represented by one entry in the FAT table. The size of each
entry is dependent on the version of FAT being used. In the FAT12 file
system, 12 bits are used for each entry; in FAT16, 16 bits are used; and in
FAT32, 32 bits are being used.2 The name of the file system variant is
actually derived from the number of bits used to represent a cluster in the
FAT table.
Each cluster in the file system is given a value in the FAT table. A value of
0x00000000 (in FAT32) means that the cluster is unallocated. Any value
greater than 0xOFFFFFF8 generally signifies an end of file marker, while a
value of 0xOFFFFFF7 signifies a cluster which contains one or more
damaged sectors. The first cluster number in a FAT file system is 
. This
means that the first two entries in the FAT table are not used in the same
manner as the others. They can be used for other storage purposes.
Officially, cluster 
 is used to show the media type. The least significant
byte is the same as that found in the boot sector while the remaining 
bits are set to one. This gives a value of 0x0FFFFFF8 for fixed media. The
second cluster stores the end of chain marker although it would appear that
any value above 0x0FFFFFF7 is accepted as the end of chain marker.
Consider a file that occupies three clusters in the file system (clusters 3, 6
and 4). Listing 5.1 shows an excerpt from this FAT structure. The three
clusters of interest are underlined. In order to recover the file content the
starting cluster is first determined to be 
 from the Directory Entry
(Section 5.1.5). The entry for cluster 
 in the FAT table is then consulted.
The value at this location is 0x06. This means that the next cluster in the
chain is Cluster 
. Consulting this position in the FAT shows that the next
cluster in the file's content is 
. When the entry for cluster 
 is
examined the end of file marker (0x0FFFFFFF) is discovered. This signifies
the end of the FAT chain. Combining this information shows that the file's
contents occupy clusters 3, 6 and 4.

Listing 5.1 also shows how file fragmentation is handled in FAT file
systems. The fact that directory entries store only the starting cluster
requires the FAT table to be consulted in every case in order to determine
the subsequent clusters in the chain. Hence, in the FAT file system, there is
no difference in how contiguous and fragmented files are recovered. In
every case3 the starting cluster is identified in the directory entry and the
FAT chain is then extracted from the FAT table.
5.1.5 Directory Entries
Directories in the FAT file system are merely normal files which contain a
sequence of directory entries as content. A directory entry is a 
 byte
structure that contains the file's name and all metadata associated with the
file. The directory entry structure is of vital importance in FAT forensics. It
allows the files on the volume to be listed, file metadata to be gathered and
file content to be recovered.
There are two types of directory entry that are used in FAT. Every file in the
FAT file system will have one of these structures. Table 5.4 shows the
structure of the generic directory entry. However, this structure is limited in
filename length, allowing only for 8.3 filenames. Hence there is a second
type of directory entry called a LFN directory entry. This structure is shown
in Table 5.6. It allows for filename length greater than the traditional 8.3
format.

Table 5.4 FAT generic directory entry structure.
Offset Len. Name
Description
0x00
0x08 File Name
The file name (the 8 of the 8.3 naming
scheme). In the case of filenames shorter than
eight bytes the remaining bytes are zero
filled. If the first is 0xE5 or 0x00 then the
directory entry is unallocated.
0x08
0x03 File Extension The file extension (the 3 of the 8.3 naming
scheme).
0x0B 0x01 Flags
Bitmask flags representing the file attributes
(see Table 5.5).
0x0C 0x01 Reserved
Reserved.
0x0D 0x01 Creation Time
(
s)
Subsecond component of the creation time.
Valid values are in the range 
–
.
0x0E
0x02 Creation Time FAT time structure representing the creation
time (Section 5.1.6).
0x10
0x02 Creation Date FAT date structure representing the creation
date (Section 5.1.6).
0x12
0x02 Access Date
FAT date structure representing the last
accessed date (Section 5.1.6).
0x14
0x02 First Cluster
(Hi)
The high two bytes of the address of the first
cluster of the file's content. In FAT12 and
FAT16 these are always zero.
0x16
0x02 Modification
Time
FAT time structure representing the content
modification time (Section 5.1.6).
0x18
0x02 Modification
Date
FAT date structure representing the content
modification date (Section 5.1.6).
0x1A 0x02 First Cluster
(Lo)
The low two bytes of the address of the first
cluster in the file's content. In FAT12/FAT16
these two bytes are all that is required. The
higher bytes are never used.
0x1C 0x04 File Size
The size of the file in bytes (0 for directories).

Table 5.5 FAT flag values.
Value
Interpretation
0x01 (
) Read‐only
0x02 (
) Hidden
0x04 (
) System File
0x08 (
) Volume Label
0x0F (
) Long File Name
0x10 (
) Directory
0x20 (
) Archive
There are some points to note about the FAT directory entry structure.
Firstly, 
 bytes is not much space in which to store very detailed
information about a file. If you compare the output of Sleuth Kit's istat
command when run on a FAT file system to a more modern and complex
file system you will see a large difference in the volume of reported
information. Listing 5.2 shows an example of this with the output from both
FAT32 and ext4 file systems. It is clear that ext4 contains more metadata
information than FAT. There are four timestamps for instance and not just
three that are found in FAT. The timestamps are more detailed in ext4 than
in FAT, although in Listing 5.2 they have been truncated, providing
nanosecond granularity, as opposed to two second granularity in FAT. Ext4
also provides a generation ID, UID, GID, mode and number of links, none
of which FAT provides. However, there is one piece of information that FAT
provides that is not present in the ext4 filesystem, at least not in the
metadata structure, that is the filename. The key realisation when
performing any file system forensic task is that all file systems are different.
They all store different information. It is essential that analysts fully
understand the information that it is possible to obtain from a particular file
system and any limitations associated with that information.

Consider the output from istat when run on the FAT file system (Listing
5.2). There is potential confusion in the time stamp values. The file was
both created and last written at 10:46:44 (UTC) on 1 November 2021. That
is understandable. It would appear from these values that the file was
created and then never modified after creation. However, confusion occurs
when the last access time is considered. Sleuth Kit shows that the file was
last accessed at 00:00:00 on 1 November 2021. That is over 10 hours before
the file was created! Obviously something is wrong as a file can't be
accessed before it is created. Examine the information that is available in
the generic FAT directory entry (Table 5.4) and in particular look at the
date/time values that are available. While both creation and modification
have both date and time values, the access value has only a date available.
There is no access time structure in the FAT directory entry! Sleuth Kit (and
many other tools) choose to display a value of 00:00:00, when in reality
there is no value. It is hoped the reader can see the potential issues if asked
about this in court. It is the author's belief that doubt could be cast upon an
expert's testimony by simply asking how the file was accessed before it was
created. If the analyst is unaware of the FAT file system's stored data and
how forensic tools report that data, the analyst would be unable to answer
the question!

Table 5.6 FAT LFN directory entry structure.
Offset Size
Name
Description
0x00
0x01 Sequence
Sequence number of the LFN entry. If this
value is 0xE5 or 0x00 the directory entry is
unallocated.
0x01
0x0A Filename (1–
5)
Characters 1–5 of the filename. Note
characters are stored in UTF‐16 format.
0x0B 0x01 Flags
Flag containing file attributes (see Table 5.5).
The value should always be 0x0F in the case
of an LFN.
0x0C 0x01 Reserved
Reserved.
0x0D 0x01 Checksum
Checksum of the short name from the
subsequent generic directory entry.
0x0E
0x0C Filename (6–
11)
Characters 6–11 of the filename.
0x1A 0x02 Reserved
Reserved – must be zero.
0x1C 0x04 Filename
(12–13)
Characters 12–13 of the filename.
The LFN directory entry allows for filenames longer than the traditional 8.3
scheme. The structure of an LFN entry is shown in Table 5.6. Generally the
LFN entries are found in reverse order before the actual directory entry
itself. The sequence number is used to confirm the order of these entries.
The sequence number of the last LFN for a file (generally the first directory
entry to appear in the sequence of directory entries) is XOR'd with 0x40.
Hence to get the actual value this must be reversed, i.e. XOR'd again with
0x40. Listing 5.3 shows an example of a file with a LFN (this file is in the
FAT32_V2.E01 disk image – see Section 5.2.2).

In Listing 5.3 each of the LFN directory entries has a flag value of 0x0F
(underlined). In each case the checksum value is 0xA0 showing the LFNs
are most likely belonging to the same file (obviously with only a single byte
checksum there is a large probability of collision occurring). The first byte
in each of the entries represents the sequence. These bytes are 0x42 and
0x01. As stated previously the sequence byte in the first entry is XOR'd
with 0x40 giving:
This result shows the first LFN entry is the last part of the filename,
sequence number 2. The name components of each of the LFN directories
can be combined to give: thelongbridge.jpg.
5.1.6 FAT Date and Time
Section 3.4 introduced epoch time values, in which time is implemented in
a computer as a counter from a particular moment. The FAT family of file
systems is the only file system that does not use an epoch‐based time
system. Instead FAT uses bit fields to store the date and time.
The FAT date is a two‐byte structure which is divided into three separate
components, year, month and day. The bit field structure is shown in Figure
5.2. In this, the most significant seven bits are used to represent the year.
This allows for 
 possible values. Hence, FAT defines year 0 to
be 1980. This means that 1980 must be added to this stored value to get the
actual year. The next four bits represent the month and the final five bits
represent the day.

Figure 5.2 The FAT date bit field structure.
To demonstrate the FAT date consider a value of 0x5361. This value is
converted as follows:
0x5361
Binary
0101 0011 0110 
Group
Convert
Y + 1980
Hence the FAT date 0x5361 is actually 1 November 2021. The FAT time
uses the same method of storage (Figure 5.3). Here the five most significant
bits represent the hour while the next six bits represent minutes. This leaves
five bits to represent the seconds; however, this only provides 
possible values. As this is not sufficiently large to represent 
 seconds,
the FAT time actually records seconds divided by two!
Figure 5.3 The FAT time bit field structure.
Consider a recovered FAT Time value of 0x5DC5. Using the same method
as shown for FAT date, this value is converted to a human‐readable form.

(5.1)
0x5DC5
Binary
0101 1101 1100 
Group
Convert
S 
2
This results in a time value of 11:46:10 or 11:46:11.4 The FAT time value
that is stored in file systems is stored as local time, in other words, in the
computer's timezone. This is unlike most modern file systems which
generally store time as UTC.
5.1.7 Mapping Clusters to Sectors
It was mentioned previously that the clustering area in FAT begins in the
data area (see Figure 5.1). The first cluster in the FAT file system is cluster
. How are these cluster numbers mapped to sectors in the FAT file
system? In order to determine the actual sector it is necessary to gather
certain information from the VBR. This includes cluster size (
);
reserved area size (
); FAT size (
); and the number of FATs (
).
The sector number, 
, corresponding to cluster number 
, is given by
Equation 5.1.
The value, 
, is the physical sector number in the file system, which is
then multiplied by the sector size to obtain the actual byte offset in the file
system.
5.2 Analysis of FAT32
In this section the analysis of the FAT32 file system is discussed. The
section begins by providing information on how FAT32 file systems are
created and is followed by a brief description of the file systems that are
provided for analysis in the remainder of this chapter.

5.2.1 Creating FAT32 File Systems
A FAT32 file system can be created on all operating systems. In the Linux
terminal the command to create FAT32 file systems is given in Listing 5.4
where dev_id is the device identifier (e.g. /dev/sdc2).5
The mkfs.vfat command creates a FAT file system. The file system type
(i.e. FAT12, FAT16 or FAT32) is specified by the ‐F flag. If omitted
mkfs.vfat will pick the variant most appropriate to the partition size. The
command in Listing 5.4 also specifies the file system name (FAT_FS) using
the ‐n flag.
5.2.2 Supplied FAT32 Image Files
A number of disk images are analysed during this chapter. These are
available from the book's website and are summarised in Table 5.7. Listing
5.5 shows the files/directories present in FAT32_V1.E01. To create
FAT32_V2.E01Files/delete.txt was deleted, Files/thelongbridge.jpg was
created and the file info.txt was replaced with an updated version.
Table 5.7 Supplied image files available from the book's website.
Value
Interpretation
FAT32_V1.E01 A basic FAT32 file system with three files and one
directory.
FAT32_V2.E01 This is FAT32_V1.E01 with the file delete.txt deleted,
and a new file called thelongbridge.jpg added.
FAT32_V3.E01 This file system is used in the chapter exercises.

5.2.3 FAT32 Manual Analysis
In order to fully understand the FAT32 file system this section will
introduce the reader to the manual analysis of the file system. There are a
number of steps which need to be taken in order to successfully analyse a
FAT32 file system. These are:
1. Process the VBR: The VBR is processed in order to determine the
layout of the device. During this process it is necessary to determine
the location of the reserved area, the FAT area and the data area.
Additionally the location of the root directory is required.
2. Process the Root Directory: The root directory is processed
beginning with the Volume Label entry and continuing with the files in
the root directory itself.
3. Process Subdirectories: Any directories that are identified in the root
directory are processed in the same manner as the root directory. Once
all directories have been processed the file system's contents have been
listed.
4. Recover Metadata/Content: Finally the file metadata and content is
recovered from the file system.
In the following sections these steps are presented in more detail using
FAT32_V1.E01 as an exemplar.
5.2.3.1 Process the VBR
Analysing a FAT file system begins by processing the VBR. The type of
information that is sought is shown in the output from the Sleuth Kit's fsstat
command. The fsstat tool processes more than just the VBR, it also looks at
the FSINFO structure (Section 5.1.3) and the volume label in the root
directory. In this section the necessary information in the VBR and FSINFO
structures is processed. Listing 5.6 shows the output of fsstat on
FAT_V1.E01.

To perform an analysis of the FAT file system the following information
must be obtained: sector size; cluster size; reserved area size; number of
FATs; FAT size; and the starting cluster of the root directory.
Listing 5.7 shows the contents of the VBR in FAT32_V1.E01. The above
values from this VBR are found in Table 5.8. The processing of the
remaining VBR structure is left as an exercise for the reader.

Table 5.8 Partially processed VBR from FAT32_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x0B 0x02 Sector Size
0x200 (
)
0x0D 0x01 Cluster Size
0x08 (
)
0x0E
0x02 Reserved Area
0x20 (
)
0x10
0x01 # FATS
0x02 (
)
0x24
0x04 FAT Size
0x400 (
)
0x2C 0x04 Root Dir. Cluster 0x02 (
)
Table 5.8 provides sufficient information to map the entire file system. The
reserved area is 
 sectors in size. This is followed by 
 FAT tables,
each of which is 
 sectors. The data area is found directly after this
beginning at sector 
 (i.e. 
).
The final task is to locate the root directory itself. Table 5.8 shows the
starting cluster of the root directory to be cluster 
. Using this value, and
those in Table 5.8, in Equation 5.1 gives:
This result means that the root directory is located at the very start of the
data area, in sector 
. For the purposes of analysing this file system
one cluster is sufficient. It may be necessary in other file systems to follow
a FAT chain in the FAT table from cluster 
 to determine if more clusters
are required.

5.2.3.2 Process the Root Directory
Once the root directory has been located the next step is to process it.
Listing 5.8 shows the contents of the root directory. The first entry in the
root directory is the volume label. This is followed by LFN and generic
directory entries. The generic entries are underlined in Listing 5.8.
Table 5.9 shows some of the processed values of the generic directory
entries in the root directory. From this it is seen that there is one directory
(Files) and two files in the root directory of this file system. Notice that by
processing the generic directory entries the file metadata is also recovered.
The only structure remaining to be processed is the volume label (shown in
Section 5.3.2).

Table 5.9 Processed generic root directory entries in FAT32_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Entry 1 Entry 2
Entry 3
0x00
0x0B File name
FILES
INFO.TXT CLIFFS.JPG
0x0B 0x01 Flags
0x10
0x20
0x20
0x0C 0x01 Reserved
0x00
0x00
0x00
0x0D 0x01 Creation Time (
 s) 0x4E
0x5E
0x70
0x0E
0x02 Creation Time
0x5DA8 0x5D88
0x5D98
0x10
0x02 Creation Date
0x575B 0x575B
0x575B
0x12
0x02 Access Date
0x575B 0x575B
0x575B
0x14
0x02 First Cluster (hi)
0x00
0x00
0x00
0x16
0x02 Modification Time
0x5DA8 0x5D88
0x5D98
0x18
0x02 Modification Date
0x575B 0x575B
0x575B
0x1A 0x02 First Cluster (Lo)
0x03
0x04
0x05
0x1C 0x04 File Size
0x00
0x8F
0x3E9EA
5.2.3.3 Process Sub‐directories
The next step in the analysis of the FAT file system is to process all the sub‐
directories. Sub‐directories are identical to the root directory in structure
(except that they will not have a volume label entry). Hence all sub‐
directories can be processed in the same manner as the root directory. Once
all sub‐directories have been processed the listing of all files in the file
system is complete.
5.2.3.4 Recover Metadata/Content
The final step in the analysis of the FAT file system is to recover the file
metadata and content. Processing directories has a very desirable side effect
for metadata recovery. As all metadata is stored in the directory entries, by
processing these entries metadata is also recovered. The information
provided in Table 5.9 contains all of the file/directory metadata for the
files/directories in the root directory.

In order to recover the file content it is also necessary to refer to Table 5.9.
Consider the file INFO.TXT. The first cluster of this file is 0x04 (
) and
it is 0x8F (
) bytes in size. Cluster 
 is found in sector number:
Listing 5.9 shows 0x8F bytes at sector number 
.
But what about a larger file? INFO.TXT was only 
 bytes in size,
much smaller than a single cluster. What about a file such as CLIFFS.JPG
which is 0x3E9EA (
) bytes beginning in cluster 0x05 (
)? As

this is much larger than the cluster size (
 bytes) multiple clusters
must be used. The directory entry provides only the first cluster. In this case
the FAT table is consulted. Listing 5.10 shows an excerpt from the FAT
table for this file system. From this, the value in cluster 
's position is
0x06. This means that the second cluster is 0x06 (
). Reading the value
here gives 0x07 and so forth. This file happens to be contiguous occupying
clusters (
–
). Cluster 
's entry in the FAT table shows
0x0FFFFFFF, the end of chain marker.
As the file is contiguous it can be recovered in one command as shown in
Listing 5.11. The starting sector for the file is 
 (Equation 5.1). The
resulting file is shown in Figure 5.4

Figure 5.4 The recovered CLIFFS.JPG file.
These methods are used to recover all files in FAT32 allowing for the
verification of file system forensic tool results. It is left as an exercise for
the reader to process the remaining structures in FAT32_V1.E01.
5.3 FAT32 Advanced Analysis
The FAT file system is the simplest of file systems that are still in regular
use. Deleted files and the volume label are the only advanced topics to be
considered in this section.
5.3.1 Deleted Files
Listing 5.12 shows the contents of the Files directory in FAT32_V1.E01.
This directory contains a file called delete.txt. The generic directory entry
for this file is underlined. Processing this shows that the contents of this file

are located in cluster 0x44 (
) which is found in sector 
 by
Equation 5.1. Listing 5.13 shows the contents of this sector, clearly showing
the file's content.
In the supplied FAT32_V2.E01 file system this file has been deleted.
Examining the content of sector 
 in this image shows that the
content of the file is still present on disk. This is shown in Listing 5.14. This
means that deleting a file does not automatically overwrite the content in
FAT32, the file has only been marked as deleted. Can this information be
recovered using the file system structures or is it recoverable only through
the use of data carving techniques?
Listing 5.15 shows the directory entries for the file in FAT32_V2.E01.
Firstly we see that they are still present, both the LFN and the generic
directory entry (highlighted). The first byte in each directory entry has been
altered to read 0xE5, signalling that these directory entries are no longer
allocated. However, the rest of the directory entry content is unchanged.
This means that the file's metadata can be recovered. The filename in the
generic directory entry is missing the first character; however, the LFN
filename is intact. So the filename can also be recovered6 along with the
metadata.

But what about the content? The generic entry contains the starting cluster
and the file size. This information is still present. Next the FAT table
(Listing 5.16) is examined.
From the FAT table it is clear that the cluster which contained the file
content has been marked as unallocated. This means it is impossible to
guarantee correct recovery of file content, at least in the case of large files.
For files smaller than a single cluster recovery is guaranteed (assuming the
file has not been overwritten in the meantime). However, recovery will
work for this particular file as it occupies only a single cluster. Recovery
will also work for contiguous files. Hence, in the FAT file system recovery
of deleted files (which have not been overwritten) is guaranteed in the case
of small files (less than a single cluster) or contiguous files, but not in the
case of fragmented files as the required entries in the FAT table will be
overwritten.
5.3.2 The Volume Label
The volume label is a very simple structure that is found at the beginning of
the root directory. As with all directory entries it is a 32‐byte structure. The
volume label from FAT32_V2.E01 is shown in Listing 5.17. Volume labels
are merely generic directory entries with an attribute value of 0x08. The
‘filename’ in this case refers to the actual Volume Label. The value of this
in Listing 5.17 is FAT_FS. The time values appear to refer to when the
volume was created.

5.4 Summary
This chapter examined the FAT file system and the forensic analysis
methods used on it. The important structures such as VBR, FAT and
directory entries were introduced and a method of analysis described.
Additionally the effect of file deletion on analysis was discussed.
Specifically this chapter covered the FAT 32 version of the FAT file system.
The analysis methods for earlier variants (FAT12 and FAT 16) are almost
identical. The only change is in addressing. The FAT table uses a smaller
number of bytes to represent each cluster than does FAT 32. The next
chapter introduces the latest incarnation of the FAT file system, ExFAT. It is
very similar to the FAT file system but is more complex and therefore
deserves a separate chapter.
Exercises
1. Represent the following dates/times as FAT date/time values.
a. 14:37:28 on 17 March 2023
b. 07:12:57 on 25 December 2077
c. 23:59:59 on 31 December 1999.
2. What dates/times are represented by the following FAT date/time
values?
a. Date: 0x5199; Time: 0x4CBA
b. Date: 0x4885; Time: 0x1A3D
c. Date: 0x4934; Time: 0x432F
3. In relation to the file system contained in FAT32_V3.E01, answer the
following questions (note that you should use manual means to answer
these and then confirm your answers using file system forensic tools):

a. What is the volume label?
b. In which sector does the data area commence?
c. In which cluster/sector is the root directory located?
d. The root directory contains a single folder. What is the complete
name of this folder?
e. In which clusters is the file BRIDGE.JPG located?
f. Process the metadata structure for BRIDGE.JPG. In your answer
all date/time values should be given in a human‐readable format.
Bibliography
Altheide, C. and Carvey, H.A. (2011). Digital Forensics with Open Source
Tools: Using Open Source Platform Tools for Performing Computer
Forensics on Target Systems: Windows, Mac, Linux, UNIX, etc.
Rockland, MA:Syngress; Oxford.
Bhat, W.A. and Quadri, S.M. (2010). Review of FAT data structure of
FAT32 file system. Oriental Journal of Computer Science and
Technology 3 (1): 161–164.
Buchholz, F. and Spafford, E. (2004). On the role of file system metadata in
digital forensics. Digital Investigation 1 (4): 298–309.
Carrier, B. (2005). File System Forensic Analysis. Boston, MA;
London:Addison‐Wesley.
FAT File Systems (2024). FAT32, FAT16, FAT12 ‐ NTFS.com [Internet].
www.ntfs.com. [cited 2024 June 1]. http://www.ntfs.com/fat.systems.htm
(accessed 13 August 2024).
GoLinuxCloud (2020). Found a swap file by the name.XXX.swp –
GoLinuxCloud [Internet]. www.golinuxcloud.com. [cited 2024 June 1].
https://www.golinuxcloud.com/found-a-swap-file-by-the-name/
(accessed 13 August 2024).
Lee, W.Y., Kim, K.H., and Lee, H. (2019). Extraction of creation‐time for
recovered files on windows FAT32 file system. Applied Sciences 9 (24):

5522. https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/9/24/5522 (accessed 17
December 2024).
Microsoft Corporation (2024). Microsoft Extensible Firmware Initiative
FAT32 File System Specification FAT: General Overview of On‐Disk
Format [cited 2024 March 1].
https://download.microsoft.com/download/1/6/1/161ba512-40e2-4cc9-
843a-923143f3456c/fatgen103.doc (accessed 13 August 2024).
Minnaard, W. (2014). The Linux FAT32 allocator and file creation order
reconstruction. Digital Investigation 11 (3): 224–233.
Nabity, P. and Landry, B.J. (2009). A digital forensic comparison of FAT32
and NTFS file systems using evidence eliminator [cited 2024 March 31].
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:140112795 (accessed 13
August 2024).
Rusbarsky, K.L. (2012). A forensic comparison of NTFS and FAT32 file
systems [cited 2024 March 3].
https://www.marshall.edu/forensics/files/RusbarskyKelsey_Research-
Paper-Summer-2012.pdf (accessed 17 December 2024).
Notes
1 ExFAT is considered a variant of the FAT file system, but is sufficiently
more advanced that it is discussed in a separate chapter (Chapter 6).
2 Strictly speaking only 28 bits of the 32 are used for addressing in FAT32!
3 In the case of small files (i.e. files that require only a single cluster) it is
unnecessary to consult FAT in order to recover the file.
4 There is no fractional component allowed in this value; hence,
.
5 Caution: Executing this command will overwrite any previously existing
file system in the partition.

6 Strictly speaking if there were multiple LFN the sequence numbers would
be unknown. However, they generally appear in order from last to first
so it is possible to guess the original LFN.
OceanofPDF.com

6
The ExFAT File System
The exFAT file system is the latest version in the File Allocation Table
(FAT) family of file systems. This file system was introduced by Microsoft
in 2006 with the express purpose of creating a file system that would be
suitable for larger flash‐based storage devices, without the high overheads
that some modern file systems suffer. In doing this, exFAT overcame some
of the limitations of the FAT32 file system but it is still quite similar to
FAT32. An ability to analyse FAT32 will make the analysis of exFAT much
easier.
One of the main developments in exFAT is the use of 
 byte file size
values as opposed to four byte values in FAT32 (and only two byte values in
earlier FAT variants). This leads to support for much larger files,
theoretically up to 
 EiB. However, the maximum volume size is only
 PiB meaning that the largest file size must be less than this value.
The maximum volume size is again theoretical. The largest recommended
exFAT volume size is 
 TiB. This is a vast increase on the 
 TiB
maximum that is available in the FAT32 file system. Other FAT32 limits
such as the number of files per directory and the maximum number of files
are also increased in exFAT (see Table 4.9).
All major operating systems provide native support for exFAT and as such it
is replacing FAT as the standard file system on removable media. This
means that knowledge of exFAT is vitally important for digital
investigators.
From an investigative point of view, exFAT provides more accurate
information in relation to time. Firstly the granularity of the creation and
modification timestamps is 10 ms, as opposed to two seconds as found in
FAT.1 Additionally the access time granularity is now 
 seconds. This is
due to the introduction of a FAT time value for access time. Previous FAT
variants maintain only an access date giving a 
 day granularity. Finally
the exFAT file system stores timezone information. As with FAT the time

value recorded in the file system is a local time value but unlike FAT a
timezone component is also provided. This means that more accurate
information about time can be obtained from an exFAT file system than can
be discovered in a FAT file system.
The remainder of this chapter will examine the on‐disk structures in the
exFAT file system (Section 6.1). The chapter then proceeds to manually
analyse an exFAT file system (Section 6.2) before discussing some
advanced topics in Section 6.3.
6.1 On‐Disk Structures
The exFAT file system is, by modern standards, a simple file system. As an
extension of the FAT file system, exFAT contains very similar structures.
Concepts that were introduced in Chapter 5 are applicable to the exFAT file
system.
The general layout of exFAT is shown in Figure 6.1. From this it is clearly
similar to the FAT file system as there is a volume boot record (VBR)
structure, a FAT and a data area. Where the file system differs from FAT is
that a backup of the VBR structure exists and that there is generally only a
single FAT.2 The VBR backup is present due to the importance of this
structure. Losing the VBR could lose access to the entire file system and as
such a backup of the structure is found immediately after the original copy.
Note that each VBR is 12 sectors in size. Section 6.1.1 describes the
structure of the exFAT VBR. The FAT table is very similar to that found in
FAT although by default only a single copy exists. The removal of the
second FAT structure is designed to improve efficiency. When files are
written to FAT file systems both FAT tables must be updated leading to a
slower write time. In exFAT only a single FAT table needs to be updated.
Also in exFAT not every file uses the FAT table as only fragmented files
need to utilise the table. The FAT table is described in Section 6.1.2. The
final area in the exFAT file system is the data area in which files/directories
are found. ExFAT uses the same concept of directory entries that FAT used
but there are many more directory entry types. Section 6.1.3 introduces the
various types of directory entry that are present in the exFAT file system
and explains their purpose and how they are processed.

Figure 6.1 The layout of the exFAT file system.
6.1.1 Volume Boot Record
The exFAT VBR is found in the first 
 sectors of the file system. A
backup of the VBR is found immediately after the primary copy. There are
a number of structures found in the VBR. The first sector contains the main
boot sector, which is immediately followed by the extended boot sector.
These are the two most important sectors in the VBR from an investigative
perspective. Sector 9 contains OEM parameters, parameters that are specific
to particular manufacturers. These parameters are defined by the individual
manufacturer, not by the exFAT file system itself. The final sector contains
repeating checksums of the VBR structure (excluding the percentage of the
file system in use and the Volume Flags).
Listing 6.1 shows the output from the fsstat command on an exFAT file
system. From this the similarities between exFAT and FAT are clear. The
layout contains similar areas such as FAT, root directory and data area. The
cluster range begins at 
 as it does in FAT. The two largest differences are
those already mentioned: exFAT contains a backup of the VBR and
generally only a single copy of FAT.
The fsstat tool reads the VBR to generate the information in Listing 6.1.
The structure of the main boot record (Sector 0) is given in Table 6.1.

Table 6.1 The structure of the exFAT main boot sector (sector 0).
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x03 Jump
Jump instruction.
0x03
0x08 OEM Name
The OEM name usually EXFAT.
0x0B 0x35 Reserved
Zero'd.
0x40
0x08 Sector Offset
The partition sector offset, zero in the case
of removable media.
0x48
0x08 Volume Size
Total volume size in sectors.
0x50
0x04 FAT Offset
Sector offset to first FAT.
0x54
0x04 FAT Size
The FAT size in sectors.
0x58
0x04 Data Region
Offset
The sector offset of the data region.
0x5C 0x04 Data Region
Size
The data area size in clusters.
0x60
0x04 Root Directory Root directory cluster address.
0x64
0x04 Serial Number
The volume serial number.
0x68
0x02 Revision
The file system revision number.
0x6A 0x02 Flags
Bit field flag values: Bit 0 – currently active
FAT (0 – FAT 1; 1 – FAT 2); Bit 1 – dirty
flag (0 – clean; 1 – dirty); Bit 2 – media
failure bit (0 – none; 1 – failure). Remaining
bits are reserved.
0x6C 0x01 Bytes/Sector
The sector size in bytes is found by raising 2
to the power of this value. If the value is
0x09, then the sector size is 
bytes.
0x6D 0x01 Sectors/Cluster The number of sectors per cluster is found
by raising 2 to the power of this value. If the
value is 0x06 then the cluster consists of
 sectors.
0x6E
0x01 # FATS
The number of FATs present.

Offset Size Name
Description
0x6F
0x01 Drive #
Drive number (typically 0x80).
0x70
0x01 Used
Percentage
The percentage of data area in use.
0x71
0x07 Reserved
Zero'd.
From Table 6.1 it is clear that the majority of information shown in Listing
6.1 can be recreated from the volume boot record. Both sector and cluster
size are given, allowing for addresses to be calculated for various structures.
The sector offset to the FAT table is provided along with the size of said
table. The number of FATs is also provided, although in exFAT this is 0x01
by default. The cluster number of the root directory is provided which gives
the location of the root directory in the data area. This needs to be combined
with cluster and sector size in order to get the actual byte offset to the root
directory. The OEM Name, EXFAT, can be used to identify the file

system type.
6.1.2 File Allocation Table
The FAT serves the same purpose in exFAT as in the FAT file system. It
allows the FAT chains to be created. When files occupy multiple clusters the
first location is found in the FAT table, this then points to the next cluster in
the chain, which points to the next. This process continues until an end of
chain marker is discovered.

Each cluster in the FAT table is represented by a four‐byte value. The first
addressable cluster is cluster 
, as it is in the FAT file system. The first
entry in the table (which could be considered the non‐existent cluster 0)
contains the media type in the least significant byte, with the remaining
bytes containing 0xFFFFFF. The second entry in the FAT table (analogous
to a non‐existent cluster 1) has no meaning and is generally initialised to
0xFFFFFFFF. The subsequent four bytes refer to cluster 2, the next four
bytes to cluster 3 and so forth.
Generally FAT table entries provide cluster numbers to allow the next
cluster in the chain to be located. There are two special values for these
entries. The first, 0xFFFFFFF7, marks a cluster as bad and as such this
cluster should be unused. The second is 0xFFFFFFFF which marks the end
of a FAT chain.
Unlike the FAT filesystem not all files in exFAT will have an entry in the
FAT table. Only fragmented files will appear in the FAT table. Those files
that are stored contiguously can be located in their entirety using the
relevant directory entry for that file. As not all files will have cluster chains
in the FAT Table, an allocation bitmap structure is used to record used
clusters. This is described in more detail in Section 6.1.3.
6.1.3 Directory Entries
In a manner similar to that of FAT, directories in exFAT are composed of
directory entries. Each directory entry is 
 bytes. Each file/directory is
represented by a number of directory entries which together are called a
directory entry set. There are a total of nine directory entry types in exFAT
file systems (compared to a mere three in FAT32). Directory entry types can
be classified as either primary or secondary and can be further classified as
critical or non‐critical. Table 6.2 lists the directory entries and provides their
categorisations and codes.

Table 6.2 ExFAT directory entry types.
Name
Pri. Crit. Code Type Description
Allocation
Bitmap
Yes Yes
1
0x81 Points to the bitmap structure which
maintains the allocation status of each
cluster on the disk.
Up‐Case
Table
Yes Yes
2
0x82 Points to the up‐case table which
allows for case‐insensitive file name
searching by mapping uppercase and
lowercase characters.
Volume
Label
Yes Yes
3
0x83 Found in the root directory,
containing information about the
volume label (as listed in fsstat).
File
Yes No
5
0x85 Main file metadata structure.
Volume
GUID
Yes Yes
0
0xA0 The GUID of the volume.
TexFAT
Yes No
1
0xA1 Related to Transaction Safe exFAT.
Win CE
ACT
Yes No
2
0xA2 Related to Transaction Safe exFAT.
Stream
Extension
No Yes
0
0xC0 Provides the location of the file
content.
Filename
Extension
No Yes
1
0xC1 The filename.
A directory entry set has only a single primary directory entry but can have
up to 
 secondary directory entries. The directory type is identified by
the first byte in the directory entry. Regular files have at least three
directory entries: a primary file directory entry which contains file
metadata, a stream extension which allows the file's content to be located
and a file name extension which provides the file's name.
The directory entry type is actually a bit field. Bits 0–4 provide the code in
Table 6.2. Bit 5 is used to signify if an entry is critical. If set the entry is not
critical, while if this bit is zero the entry is critical. Bit 6 is used to
determine if it is a primary directory entry. In the case of a primary value

this bit is zero, in the case of a secondary value the bit is 1. Finally, bit 7 is
used to determine if a directory entry is in use. If this bit is set then the
entry is in use, if it is zero the entry is not in use. Take the following
directory entry type value: 0x41. This is not an entry type that appears in
Table 6.2; however, it is possible to work out what this represents. The first
step is to convert the value to binary giving: 0b01000001. The five least
significant bits represent the code which is 0b00001 or 
. This means that
this is either an allocation bitmap, texFAT or filename extension. Bit 5 is
zero meaning that this is a critical directory entry. Examining the three
directory entries of type in Table 6.2 only the allocation bitmap and the
filename extension are critical. The 0x41 type must represent one of these.
Examining Bit 6 shows a value of 1. This implies that this is a non‐primary
directory entry. Combining this information, a code of 1, secondary, critical
directory entry, means that this is a filename extension directory entry. The
most significant bit is zero meaning that this is unallocated. Most likely this
contains file name information for a deleted file! Hence even if the entry
type code does not appear in Table 6.2 it is possible to determine its type.
Before continuing to describe each directory entry type in further detail it is
necessary to describe the generic directory entry structures. Primary
directory entries all follow the same structure which is shown in Table 6.3
while secondary directory entries follow the generic structure shown in
Table 6.4.

Table 6.3 The primary directory entry generic structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x01 Entry Type
The type identifier for the directory.
0x01
0x01 Secondary
Count
The number of secondary directory entries
associated with this primary entry.
0x02
0x02 Set
Checksum
A checksum value for the primary entry and the
set of secondary entries associated with it.
0x04
0x02 Primary
Flags
Bit 0 – allocation possible; Bit 1 – no FAT
Chain. The remaining bits can be defined by the
specific directory entry type.
0x06
0x0E Custom
Defined
Data in this section differs for each directory
entry type.
0x14
0x04 First Cluster The first cluster at which data related to this
entry is located. May be redefined by certain
directory entry types.
0x18
0x08 Data Length The size of the related data in bytes. May be
redefined by certain directory entry types.
The primary directory entry's generic structure records information about
the directory set to which this primary entry belongs such as the number of
secondary entries in the set and a checksum of the directory entry set as a
whole. Note this use of checksums in exFAT means that it is a more robust
file system than the earlier FAT variants as it is able to detect
inconsistencies in data. The majority of data in the directory entry can be
redefined by the specific directory entry type. The secondary entry's generic
structure is similar, except that it has a larger custom defined area. This is
due to the lack of necessity of recording the information about secondary
entries. In the case of both the primary and secondary generic structures
both contain a first cluster and a data length. Where external data is stored
these are used as indicated but in certain directory entry types these can be
redefined. This would allow up to 
 bytes of custom data in a primary
directory entry and up to 
 bytes in a secondary entry.

Table 6.4 The secondary directory entry generic structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x01 Entry Type
The type identifier for the directory entry.
0x01
0x01 Secondary
Flags
This field is identical to the primary directory
entry's flags field.
0x02
0x12 Custom
Defined
Data in this section differs for each directory
entry type.
0x14
0x04 First Cluster The first cluster at which data related to this
entry is located. May be redefined by certain
directory entry types.
0x18
0x08 Data Length The size of the related data in bytes. May be
redefined by certain directory entry types.
The remainder of this section describes each of the directory entries in more
detail.
6.1.3.1 Allocation Bitmap (Type: 0x81)
The allocation bitmap is a primary critical directory entry (type: 0x81)
which is found in the root directory. There is one present for each copy of
the FAT. The allocation bitmap is responsible for tracking used/free clusters.
This is different from the other variants of the FAT file system which use
the FAT table to track cluster status. In exFAT the FAT table is used only if
files are fragmented. Listing 6.2 provides the allocation bitmap directory
entry from the supplied file system image (ExFAT_V1.E01). The structure
of the allocation bitmap directory entry is found in Table 6.5. This includes
the interpretation of the entry in Listing 6.2.

Table 6.5 The allocation bitmap directory entry structure. The values are
from Listing 6.2.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x01 Entry
Type
The type identifier for the entry. 0x81 for
the allocation bitmap.
0x81
0x01
0x01 Bitmap
Flags
Bit 0 describes the allocation bitmap to
which this entry refers. 0 represents FAT 1
and 1 represents FAT 2. Generally this is
zero as there is only one FAT. The
remaining bits are reserved.
0x00
0x02
0x12 Reserved Reserved.
0x00
0x14
0x04 First
Cluster
First cluster of the allocation bitmap.
0x02
0x18
0x08 Data
Length
Length of the allocation bitmap (bytes).
0x800
Each bit in the allocation bitmap represents a single cluster. The first bit
represents cluster 2 and so on. The first bit is the least significant bit in the
first byte. The location of the actual allocation bitmap is found from the
directory entry.
Consider an allocation bitmap of 0xEF36. Figure 6.2 shows the binary
value of this allocation bitmap and the clusters to which each individual bit
refers.
Figure 6.2 An example allocation bitmap (0xEF36) showing the binary
values of this bitmap and the cluster numbers to which each bit
corresponds.
From Figure 6.2 it is easy to determine that cluster 
 is currently
allocated. However, in the case of a larger allocation bitmap showing this

for all clusters is not feasible. Instead it is necessary to calculate the exact
bit for the desired cluster.
Again consider cluster 
's status in the allocation bitmap 0xEF36. It is
necessary to determine the byte number in which this cluster will be located
and also the bit number inside the byte. These calculations are:
Hence cluster 
 will be found in byte 
 at bit position 
 (counting
from the least significant bit).3 Byte position 1 contains the value 0x36
which in binary is 0b00110110, the highlighted bit is bit position 5. This
shows that cluster 
 is allocated.
6.1.3.2 Up‐Case Table (Type: 0x82)
The up‐case table directory entry is a primary, critical entry with a type
code value of 0x82. The up‐case table entry defines the location of the up‐
case table which is used to allow for case‐insensitive searching of file
names. Listing 6.3 shows the entry from the root directory of the supplied
file system image. Table 6.6 provides the structure of the up‐case table
directory entry and the processed values from Listing 6.3.

Table 6.6 The up‐case table directory entry structure. The values are from
Listing 6.3.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x01 Entry Type Type identifier (0x82).
0x82
0x01
0x03 Reserved
Reserved.
0x00
0x04
0x04 Checksum
Checksum value for the upcase
table.
0xE619D30D
0x08
0x0C Reserved
Reserved.
0x00
0x14
0x04 First
Cluster
The first cluster location for the
up‐case table.
0x03
0x18
0x08 Data
Length
The size of the up‐case table in
bytes.
0x16CC
6.1.3.3 Volume Label (Type: 0x83)
The volume label directory entry is a primary, critical entry with a type code
of 0x83. Its purpose is identical to the volume label directory entry in FAT.
It stores the actual file system label (i.e. name) that is assigned when a file
system is created. This directory entry is found only in the root directory. A
sample volume label is provided in Listing 6.4. The structure of this is
shown in Table 6.7.

Table 6.7 The volume label directory entry structure. The values are from
Listing 6.4.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x01 Type
Type identifier.
0x83
0x01
0x01 Name
Length
The length of the name in unicode
characters. Each character is 2 bytes
in size.
0x07
0x02
0x16 Volume
Label
Label in unicode, only 0x0E (
) bytes are used in this
case.
MyExFAT
0x18
0x08 Reserved
Reserved.
0x00
6.1.3.4 File (Type: 0x85)
The file directory entry is the key metadata structure. This is a primary,
critical entry with type code 0x85. Each file directory entry generally has at
least two secondary entries associated with it, one stream extension which
is used to locate the file's content and one filename extension which
contains the file's name. Note that there may be more than two secondary
entries associated with a single file entry. The structure of the file directory
entry is given in Table 6.8.

Table 6.8 The file directory entry structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x01 Type
Directory entry type (0x85 for File).
0x01
0x01 # Secondary
Entries
The count of the number of secondary
entries for this file.
0x02
0x02 Checksum
A checksum calculated for the set of
directory entries for this file.
0x04
0x02 Attributes
File attributes (Bit 0: Read‐Only; Bit 1:
Hidden; Bit 2: System; Bit 3: Reserved; Bit
4: Directory; Bit 5: Archive).
0x06
0x02 Reserved
Reserved.
0x08
0x04 Creation
Creation timestamp.
0x0C 0x04 Last Modified
Last modification timestamp.
0x10
0x04 Last Access
Last access timestamp.
0x14
0x01 Create 10 ms
10 ms component of the creation time value.
0x15
0x01 Modification
10 ms
10 ms component of the modification time
value.
0x16
0x01 Creation
Timezone
Timezone offset for the creation time.
0x17
0x01 Modification
Timezone
Timezone offset for the modification time.
0x18
0x01 Access
Timezone
Timezone offset for the access time.
0x19
0x07 Reserved
Reserved.
The file directory entry contains the file's metadata. Often the most
interesting information available to an investigator is that of time. Recall
the FAT file system, this contains a FAT date and time structure for the
creation and modification timestamps, and a FAT date for the accessed
timestamp. The granularity of the access time is therefore one day, while the
granularity of the creation and modification timestamps is two seconds.4
The exFAT timestamps are composed of a FAT date and time (see Sections

3.1 and 3.2). The first two bytes of the four represent the FAT time, and the
second two represent the FAT date. Consider the raw data of 0x2C783B48
(LE). The FAT Date component is 0x483B, and the FAT Time is 0x782C.
These values can be converted as FAT dates and times respectively. Both
the creation and modification timestamps also have a 10 ms second
component. This value can be between 0x00 and 0xC7 (
). The value
is then divided by 
 to give the seconds to be added to the time.
Consider an example in which the 10 ms component is 0x14. This is 
,
which when divided by 
 gives 0.2 s.
There is more time information available to the investigator in exFAT than
in FAT. FAT stored local time with no reference to the actual timezone
itself. Most modern file systems store time values in UTC. ExFAT still uses
local time, but also stores the timezone in which the local time value was
set. This allows times to be compared across devices. The timezone is
stored in a single byte. The most significant bit tells if the timezone is active
(1) or inactive (0). The remaining seven bits are a two's complement
number (see Section 3.2.7). This is the number of 
 minute intervals
from UTC. Consider the value 0x84 (0b1000 0100). The most significant
bit is 1 meaning this timezone is active. The two's complement number is
0b0000100 which is 
. This means that the UTC offset is
 minutes. This means that the timezone for the time value
is UTC+1.
6.1.3.5 Volume GUID (Type: 0xA0)
The volume GUID entry (type 0xA0) is a primary, non‐critical entry which
contains a GUID (Globally Unique Identifier). This GUID allows
applications to distinguish between volumes based on this value. The
structure of the volume GUID directory entry is shown in Table 6.9. In the
case that a Volume GUID directory entry is present in the file system there
should only be a single entry found in the root directory. Many file systems
have no volume GUID directory entry.

Table 6.9 The volume GUID directory entry structure.
Offset Size
Name
Description
0x00
0x01 Entry Type
Type identifier (0xA0).
0x01
0x01 Secondary Count Count of secondary directory entries.
0x02
0x02 Checksum
Checksum of the directory entry set.
0x04
0x02 Flags
Flags are all zero for this entry.
0x06
0x10 Volume GUID
The volume GUID for this file system.
0x16
0x0A Reserved
Reserved.
6.1.3.6 Stream Extension (Type: 0xC0)
The stream extension is a critical, secondary directory entry. The stream
extension is used to locate the file/directory content. The structure of the
stream extension is shown in Table 6.10.

Table 6.10 The stream extension directory entry structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x01 Type
Type identifier (0xC0).
0x01
0x01 Flags
Secondary flags. The least significant bit is set if
the record is active. Bit 1 is set in the case that
the content is contiguous meaning no FAT chain
is required.
0x02
0x01 Reserved
Reserved.
0x03
0x01 Name Size Size of name (in UCS‐2 encoded characters).
Double this value to get the number of bytes. The
name is stored in one or more file name
extension entries (each entry holds 0x0F
characters).
0x04
0x02 Checksum A checksum of the name.
0x06
0x02 Reserved
Reserved.
0x08
0x08 File Size
File size.
0x10
0x04 Reserved
Reserved.
0x14
0x04 Starting
Cluster
The cluster at which the file content starts. If the
contiguous bit is set then clusters are stored in a
single block and there is no need to consult the
FAT table; otherwise, the file is fragmented and
the FAT table must be consulted.
0x18
0x08 File Size
Duplicate entry for the file size.
The stream extension informs the analyst whether the file is contiguous or
fragmented. This is found in the secondary flags field. If the bit in position
1 has the value 1 the content is contiguous. In this case it is unnecessary to
consult the FAT table to locate the content. The stream extension contains
all the required information. If the value is 0 the file is fragmented. In this
case the stream extension will provide the first cluster and the FAT table is
then consulted to determine the remainder of the FAT chain.

6.1.3.7 Filename Extension
The filename extension directory entry is another secondary, critical
directory entry, which contains the file name, or, in the case of longer
filenames, a portion of the filename. Each filename extension can hold 
characters of the filename. The structure of the filename extension is given
in Table 6.11.
Table 6.11 The filename extension directory entry structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x01 Type
Type identifier (0xC1).
0x01
0x01 Flags
Secondary flags.
0x02
0x1E Filename Null terminated file name consisting of up to 
UCS‐2 encoded characters. Multiple filename
extension attributes may be used.
In the case in which multiple filename extension entries are in use the
filename is composed from all these entries in the order in which they are
encountered. Any unused bytes in a filename should be zero'd. A single file
directory entry can have up to 
 filename extensions associated with it,
meaning that the maximum filename length is 
 characters (i.e.
).
6.1.3.8 Other Directory Entries
There are a number of other directory entry types but these are unlikely to
be of interest in file system forensic analysis. These include the TexFAT
directory entry which is used as part of the Transaction Safe exFAT system,
a system which is not widely supported in current implementations. There
are also two vendor‐specific directory entries. These are the vendor GUID
entry which is used to identify the actual vendor and the vendor extension
which can contain any data that the vendor wishes. These are vendor
specific and as such their definition depends solely on the vendor in
question.

6.2 Analysis of ExFAT
This section introduces the analysis of the exFAT file system. It begins with
instructions on how to create exFAT file systems using the Linux OS and
proceeds to describe those file systems that have been supplied with this
book. These are used in the remainder of this chapter. Finally this section
describes the process of manually analysing an exFAT file system.
6.2.1 Creating ExFAT File Systems
ExFAT file systems, similar to FAT file systems, can be created on all major
operating systems. In the Linux terminal the command to create an exFAT
file system in the first partition of the second hard drive is given in Listing
6.5. This command also specifies the file system name using ‐n
‘MyExFAT’.
6.2.2 Supplied ExFAT Image Files
A number of disk images are analysed during this chapter. These are
available from the book's website and are summarised in Table 6.12.
Table 6.12 Supplied exFAT image files available from the book's website.
Image
Description
ExFAT_V1.E01 A basic exFAT file system with four files and one
directory.
ExFAT_V2.E01 This is exFAT_V1.E01 with one file deleted and a
directory added with 
 files. This directory occupies
two non‐contiguous clusters.
ExFAT_V3.E01 An exFAT file system that is used in the chapter's
exercises.

6.2.3 ExFAT Manual Analysis
In this section manual analysis of the exFAT file system is performed. This
allows the reader to fully understand the structures of exFAT and to see how
digital forensic tools analyse the file system. For demonstration purposes
ExFAT_V1.E01 will be used throughout this section.
At an abstract level the analysis method for exFAT is almost identical to
that of FAT. The necessary steps are:
1. Process the VBR: The VBR contains information relevant to the file
system as a whole. This is the information that is seen when Sleuth
Kit's fsstat command is used. This information is vital for all further
analysis as it allows other file system structures to be located in the file
system.
2. Process the Root Directory: The second step in analysis is to begin to
list the files. This happens by firstly processing the root directory. In
addition to standard user created files/directories the root directory
contains some file system structure information such as the location of
the allocation bitmap and up‐case tables along with the volume name.
3. Process Subdirectories: Once the root directory is processed each
discovered subdirectory is then processed. This allows all files to be
listed. This process continues until there are no further files to be
processed. This (combined with step 2) is equivalent to Sleuth Kit's fls
command.
4. Recover Metadata: For every file/directory that is recovered the file
directory entry is processed in order to gather the file's metadata (size,
times, etc.)
5. Recover Content: The final step is to recover the file/directory
content using the stream extension.
The remainder of this section examines these steps in more detail.
6.2.3.1 Step 1: Process the VBR
Listing 6.1 shows the output from the fsstat command when run upon the
ExFAT_V1.E01 image file. The bulk of this information is found by

processing the VBR structure. Remember that in exFAT this VBR structure
is 
 sectors in size and a backup is also found on the device.
Listing 6.6 shows the first 0x80 bytes from sector 0 in ExFAT_V1.E01.
This structure is processed in Table 6.13.

Table 6.13 Processing the main boot sector in ExFAT_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x03
0x08 OEM Name
EXFAT
0x0B 0x35 Reserved
0x00
0x40
0x08 Sector Offset
0x00
0x48
0x08 Volume Size
0x100000 (
)
0x50
0x04 FAT Offset
0x80 (
)
0x54
0x04 FAT Size
0x80 (
)
0x58
0x04 Data Region Offset 0x100 (
)
0x5C 0x04 Data Region Size
0x3FFC (
)
0x60
0x04 Root Directory
0x04 (
)
0x64
0x04 Serial Number
0x212AD518
0x68
0x02 Revision
0x100 (i.e. 1.0)
0x6A 0x02 Flags
0x00 (FAT 1 used)
0x6C 0x01 Bytes/Sector
0x09, i.e. 
 bytes.
0x6D 0x01 Sectors/Cluster
0x06, i.e. 
 sectors.
0x6E
0x01 Num FATS
0x01 (
)
0x6F
0x01 Drive #
0x80 (
)
0x70
0x01 Used Percentage
0x00
0x71
0x07 Reserved
0x00
Table 6.13 shows all the information that is available in Listing 6.1 (with
the exception of the volume label which will be processed from the root
directory). From the boot sector the file system structures can be mapped
allowing for processing to be continued.
6.2.3.2 Step 2: Process the Root Directory
From processing the VBR the root directory is located. Table 6.13 shows
that the root directory is to be found in cluster 
. To locate the sector

(6.1)
number for a given cluster, 
, the following formula is used:
Combining this formula with the relevant values found in the VBR means
that cluster 4 is located at sector 
.
Extracting 
 sectors (the sectors per cluster value) from here will extract
the contents of the root directory.5 Listing 6.7 shows the contents of this
sector.
The first three directory entries are a volume label (type: 0x83), the
allocation bitmap (type: 0x81) and the up‐case table (type: 0x82). This is
followed by four file entries (type: 0x85) each of which has a stream
extension (type: 0xC0) and one or more filename extension (type: 0xC1)
associated with it.
Sleuth Kit's fsstat command will also process the volume label directory
entry. From Table 6.7 the structure of the volume label is found. This
structure is very simple, a type identifier byte (0x83), followed by a single
byte providing the name length (0x07 characters in this case), followed by
the name itself in UTF‐16 (LE) encoded unicode characters. In the example
in Listing 6.7 the volume label value is MyExFAT. This can also be seen in
Listing 6.1.
In the case of both the allocation bitmap and the up‐case table, these
directory entries are used to locate the content of these structures. Referring
to Tables 6.5 and 6.6 the first cluster of both is found at offset 0x14 and the
data length is found at 0x18. These values for the allocation bitmap
structure are 0x02 and 0x800, respectively, meaning that the allocation
bitmap will be 
 bytes in size beginning at cluster 
. The values
for the up‐case table are 0x03 and 0x16CC, respectively.

Processing of the root directory continues with the remaining file items.
Initial analysis involves file listing, as performed by fls. In order to do this
there are two items that must be extracted, the filename and whether it
represents a file/directory. The filename can be obtained from the filename
extension attributes (type: 0xC1). Examining Listing 6.7 shows that there
are four ‘files’ present called Files,
DemonstratingVeryLongFileNamesInExFAT.txt, trees.jpg and info.txt,
respectively. To determine if each represents a file or directory it is
necessary to process the attributes in the file directory entry (type 0x85).

The attributes are found in a two‐byte bit field structure at offset 0x04. Bit 4
represents a directory. The values for the four discovered ‘files’ are: 0x10,
0x20, 0x20 and 0x20, respectively. The value 0x10 is 0b00010000. In this
case bit 4 is set meaning this is a directory. In the other cases 0x20 is
0b00100000 meaning that bit 4 is not set; hence, these are files. This means
that Files is a directory, while
DemonstratingVeryLongFileNamesInExFAT.txt, trees.jpeg and info.txt
are files. Listing 6.8 shows the output of fls which confirms this
information.
Notice that fls processes the non‐file related directory entries such as the
volume label, allocation bitmap and up‐case table entries. Note that the
virtual files/directories (v/v and V/V) are an easy way that Sleuth Kit
provides to recover other file system structures.
6.2.3.3 Step 3: Process Subdirectories
In order to list all files, directories identified in the root directory must next
be processed. In order to do this the directory must be located. In the
previous step only one single sub‐directory, Files, was identified. To get the
content of this directory the stream extension is processed. The stream
extension (type: 0xC0) is provided in Listing 6.9.

From Listing 6.9 the starting cluster is determined to be 0x05 and the file
size is 0x8000 (
) bytes. This implies that the directory entries
occupy one single cluster. Listing 6.10 shows the contents of this cluster.
From Listing 6.10 the Files sub‐directory contains a single file. Processing
the file name directory entry shows this to be delete.txt. Examining the
attributes of this shows it to be a regular file. At this stage, in this file
system, all directories have been processed (and hence all files have been
listed). In more complex file systems this process would continue until all
directory contents had been listed.
The results obtained through manual analysis can be compared to those
obtained using the fls command recursively. This is shown in Listing 6.11.
6.2.3.4 Step 4: Recover Metadata
Once the file list has been determined the next step is to recover the
metadata in relation to every file. This is achieved using the file directory
entry (type: 0x85). Listing 6.12 shows the file directory entry for the
info.txt file in the root directory.

Table 6.14 The file directory entry for info.txt in ExFAT_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x01 Type
0x85
0x01
0x01 # Secondary Entries
0x02
0x02
0x02 Checksum
0xA0C6
0x04
0x02 Attributes
0x20 (Archive)
0x06
0x02 Reserved
0x00
0x08
0x04 Creation
0x575C8044
2023‐10‐28 16:02:08
0x0C 0x04 Last Modified
0x575C8044
2023‐10‐28 16:02:08
0x10
0x04 Last Access
0x575C8044
2023‐10‐28 16:02:08
0x14
0x01 Create 10 ms
0x00
0x15
0x01 Modification 10 ms
0x00
0x16
0x01 Creation Timezone
0x00
0x17
0x01 Modification Timezone 0x00
0x18
0x01 Access Timezone
0x00
0x19
0x07 Reserved
0x00
Table 6.14 provides information about the file. For instance the file has two
secondary entries (these are the stream and filename extension which
immediately follow this file directory entry in Listing 6.7). The creation,
modification and access times are FAT date/time structures. All these show
times on the afternoon of 28 October 2023. The timezone for all of these
structures is 0x00 (meaning that there is no offset, i.e. UTC).

6.2.3.5 Step 5: Recover Content
The final step is to recover the file content. This is achieved through the
stream extension directory entry (type: 0xC0). Listing 6.13 shows the
stream extension for info.txt. The processed values are shown in Table
6.15.
Table 6.15 The stream extension directory entry for info.txt in
ExFAT_V1.E01. Values are taken from Listing 6.13.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x01 Type
0xC0
0x01
0x01 Flags
0x03
0x02
0x01 Reserved
0x00
0x03
0x01 Name Size
0x08 (
)
0x04
0x02 Checksum
0x2F7A
0x06
0x02 Reserved
0x00
0x08
0x08 File Size
0xC0 (
)
0x10
0x04 Reserved
0x00
0x14
0x04 Starting Cluster 0x19 (
)
0x18
0x08 File Size
0xC0 (
)
From Table 6.15 the starting cluster is determined to be 0x19 (
). This is
translated to a sector using the formula given in Equation 6.1.
The flags inform the analyst that this file is active and contiguous. The
value of 0x03 means that bits 0 and 1 are set, hence determining that the file
is active and contiguous, respectively. The fact that the file is contiguous
means that the FAT table is not needed in order to recover the file's content.
The final piece of information required is that of the file size, which is 0xC0

in this case. Listing 6.14 shows 0xC0 bytes at cluster 
. Listing 6.15
compares the manual recovery of info.txt with that of icat showing both to
be equivalent.
This technique works for contiguous files. Later the recovery of fragmented
files is discussed (Section 6.3.3).
6.3 ExFAT Advanced Analysis
The basic analysis of exFAT allows for recovery of much metadata and
many files. However, there are certain special cases which need further
examination. In this section these cases are addressed. These include long
file names, deleted files, fragmented files and large directories.
6.3.1 Long File Names
To this point all files that have been examined have had short file names. In
other words they have needed only a single filename extension directory

entry to store the file name. In the supplied disk image ExFAT_V1.E01,
there is a file which requires multiple filename extensions. Listing 6.16
shows this file from fls.
The directory entry set for this file is shown in Listing 6.17. This directory
entry set contains 
 secondary entries. From the stream extension the
name length is given as 0x29 (
) characters. As each filename extension
can store up to 
 characters it is necessary to have 
 filename
extensions to store this filename. The directory entry type bytes for each of
these are highlighted.
In order to reconstruct the filename it is necessary to process all the
filename extensions in the order in which they appear in the directory entry
set. Hence the first entry contains DemonstratingVe, the second contains
ryLongFileNames and the final entry contains InExFAT.txt. Putting these
together gives the filename DemonstratingVeryLongFileNamesInExFAT.txt.
6.3.2 Deleted Files
The disk image ExFAT_V2.E01 contains a number of deleted files, one of
which is Files/delete.txt which existed in ExFAT_V1.E01. Examining
ExFAT_V1.E01 shows the start of this file was located in cluster 0x1A (
) and was 0x42 (
) bytes. Listing 6.18 shows the contents of cluster
 in ExFAT_V2.E01, after the file was deleted. This clearly shows the

file content. Hence the data has not been immediately overwritten when the
file has been deleted.
Knowing the data is present after deletion is not by itself sufficient. It is
also necessary to check the metadata information. Listing 6.19 shows the
relevant directory entry set for the delete.txt file found in the Files
directory.
In this directory entry types are underlined. These types (0x05, 0x40 and
0x41) are not types that have been encountered previously. Examining their
binary values (0b00000101, 0b01000000 and 0b01000001) shows that in
each case the most significant bit is 0. This means that these records are not
active. This signifies that the records are deleted. However, to avoid
unnecessary writes to disk the exFAT file system drivers generally leave
these old entries until they require the free space. Hence it is often the case
that these records will remain. The content of the deleted file can be
recovered in the same manner as if the file were live, as the file (type:
0x05), stream extension (type: 0x40) and filename extension (type: 0x41)
directory entries still exist.
As with the FAT file system small files and contiguous files can be
recovered. Fragmented files, which require the FAT table, are not
recoverable in exFAT as the FAT chain in the FAT table is generally
overwritten.

6.3.3 Fragmented Files and Large Directories
In this section the concepts of file fragmentation and large directory
structures are introduced. The directory used in this example is fragmented
allowing both topics to be covered in a single section. The method used to
locate the clusters in which these directory entries are stored is identical to
those used to recover the content of a fragmented file.
In some earlier versions of the FAT file system directories were limited to
one cluster in size. This is not the case in exFAT. To this point all directories
that have been examined reside in one single cluster. In the image file
ExFAT_V2.E01 there is a directory in the root called LargeDir which
contains 
 files. From previous analysis of this file system the cluster
size was determined to be 
 sectors (i.e. 
 bytes). Each file
requires a minimum of three directory entries (file, stream extension and
file name extension). This means that each directory entry set will occupy a
minimum of 
 bytes. Dividing the cluster size by this value means that a
single cluster can contain at most 
 files. Hence by creating 
files it is guaranteed that more than a single cluster will be used to store the
directory contents.
Listing 6.20 shows the directory entry set for LargeDir. In this case the
stream extension marks the file as being fragmented as the flag values are
0x01 (meaning that bit 1 is not set). Hence the content's first cluster can be
found at cluster 0x1B (
) but the FAT table must be consulted to
determine the remaining content. This is also how any fragmented file, not
just a directory, is located. The relevant clusters in the FAT table are shown
in Listing 6.21.

In cluster 
 the value 0x171 (
) is found. Examining that cluster
information in the FAT table shows that the end of chain marker is found.
Hence the largeDir directory is composed of clusters 
 and 
,
meaning that large directories can be processed in an identical manner to
large files. Listing 6.22 shows the first directory entry in clusters 
 and
. The byte offsets in the FAT table are computed by simply
multiplying the cluster number by four. Hence cluster 
's FAT table
entry is found at byte offset 
 (0x6C) and cluster 
's
entry is found at byte offset 
 (0x5C4).
6.4 Summary
This chapter has examined the exFAT file system which, while very similar
to the FAT family of file systems, does provide more functionality. This is
generally achieved through the use of more directory entries, in which files
are not merely represented by a single directory entry but by a set of
directory entries (comprising at least one file entry, one stream extension
entry and one filename extension entry). While the overall structure of FAT
and exFAT is similar, their uses are different. For instance the FAT table is
used differently in exFAT and FAT. In FAT all files were recovered by

consulting the FAT Table. In exFAT, files that are marked as contiguous (i.e.
not fragmented) can be recovered without reference to the FAT table. It is
only in the case of fragmented files that the FAT table is used. This means
that the FAT table can no longer be used to determine the allocation status
of each cluster. As such an allocation bitmap structure is also found in the
root directory. This structure provides the allocation status of each cluster.
From an investigative perspective exFAT provides many advantages over
the basic FAT file system. However, these advantages come with the price
of a more complex file system for analysis. These advantages include:
Enhanced Metadata: The exFAT file system contains more metadata
information than was found in the traditional FAT file system.
Further Timestamps: The exFAT file system contains an access time
value which is not found in the traditional FAT file system.
Timestamp Granularity: All timestamps in exFAT operate at 
s
granularity. This provides a more accurate indication of the temporal
ordering of events than was possible in FAT which only provided a two
second granularity for time values.
Timezone Information: The FAT file system recorded all time values
in the local time of the computer which accessed the file system.
Hence without access to the computer in question it was impossible to
determine the timezone in which the operation occurred. The exFAT
file system now records a timezone value which removes this
difficulty.
Exercises
1. Table 6.2 provides the entry‐type codes for allocated directory entries
of various types. For each of these entry types what is the
corresponding type value for a deleted entry?
2. The following questions require access to ExFAT_V3.E01 which is
available from the book's website. In each case you should solve the
task using manual analysis and verify your results using automated
forensic tools.
a. Where does the data region commence?

b. How many FAT structures are present on the device?
c. What is the volume label?
d. At what byte offset is the root directory located?
e. The root directory contains a directory entry for an item called
Files. Is this a directory or a regular file?
f. The root directory contains a file called cove.jpg. What is the
MD5 sum of this file?
g. In relation to cove.jpg when was this file last modified?
Bibliography
ExFAT Filesystem (2024). ExFAT Filesystem [Internet]. elm-chan.org.
[updated 2017; cited 2024 March 31]. http://elm-
chan.org/docs/exfat_e.html (accessed 13 August 2024).
Hamm, J. (2009). Paradigm Solutions Extended FAT File System ExFAT. J
Hamm [Internet]. 2009 January.
https://paradigmsolutions.files.wordpress.com/2009/12/exfat-excerpt-1-
4.pdf (accessed 13 August 2024).
Heeger, J., Yannikos, Y., and Steinebach, M. (2022). An introduction to the
ExFAT file system and how to hide data within. Journal of Cyber
Security and Mobility 11 (02): 239–264.
Munegowda, K., Raju, G.T., and Raju, V.M. (2014a). Directory compaction
techniques for space optimizations in ExFAT and FAT file systems for
embedded storage devices. International Journal of Computer Science
Issues (IJCSI) 11 (1): 144.
Munegowda, K., Raju, G.T., and Maninkandanraju, V. (2014b). Design and
implementation of log structured fat and ExFAT file systems.
International Journal of Engineering and Technology 6 (4): 1708–1727.
Munegowda, K., Raju, G.T., and Maninkandanraju, V. (2014c). Adapting
Endurance and Performance Optimization Strategies of ExFAT file

system to FAT file system for embedded storage devices. International
Journal of Engineering and Technology 6 (1): 204–211.
Nordvik, R. (2024). Interpretation of file system metadata in a criminal
investigation context. PhD Dissertation. Norway: Norwegian University
of Science and Technology.
Nordvik, R. and Axelsson, S. (2022). It is about time–do exFAT
implementations handle timestamps correctly? Forensic Science
International Digital Investigation 42‐43: 301476–301476.
SANS (2024). Digital Forensics and Incident Response Blog –FAT and FAT
Directory Entries –SANS Institute [Internet]. www.sans.org. [cited 2024
March 31]. https://www.sans.org/blog/fat-and-fat-directory-entries/
(accessed 13 August 2024).
Shullich, R. (2010). Reverse Engineering the Microsoft ExFAT File System.
The SANS Institute.
Vandermeer, Y., Le‐Khac, N.A., Carthy, J., and Kechadi, T. (2018). Forensic
analysis of the ExFAT artefacts. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.08653.
Windows App Development (2024). ExFAT file system specification ‐
Win32 apps [Internet]. docs.microsoft.com. [cited 2024 May 23].
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/fileio/exfat-
specification (accessed 13 August 2024).
Notes
1 FAT32 did employ a 10 ms granularity for the creation timestamp.
2 There may be more than one FAT structure in exFAT, but the default
number is one, unlike the FAT file system which defaults to two copies
of the FAT table.
3 Remember that counting begins from 0!
4 FAT32 contains a 10 ms component for the creation time.
5 This assumes that the root directory occupies only a single cluster.

OceanofPDF.com

7
The NTFS File System
The New Technology File System (NTFS) is traditionally one of the most ‘interesting’ file
systems from a file system forensic perspective. The main reason for interest in NTFS is due to
its use as the primary drive's (i.e. C:) file system in every Windows version since Windows NT.
The file system was first introduced in Windows NT 3.1 in 1993 and to this day is still the default
Windows file system.
The NTFS file system was a fork of HPFS (the High‐Performance File System), a file system
that Microsoft and IBM were designing in partnership. Hence it shares many features with HPFS
including the MBR partition identifier (0x07).1 Prior to the introduction of NTFS, the FAT family
of file systems had been the default on Windows. As disks grew in size the FAT family provided
an obvious limitation. Cluster addresses were only four bytes in size (actually less than this in
reality). In NTFS cluster addresses could be up to eight bytes, allowing for many more clusters to
be addressed, thereby supporting large disks. Additionally NTFS was designed to ensure that the
basic operations (file read/write) were very efficient, again helping the file system to scale to
larger systems.
In its day NTFS was a very modern file system. NTFS provided support for the following
functionality (many of which are still encountered in new file systems to this day):
B‐Tree‐Based Directories: Directory storage in NTFS, as in many modern file systems, is
based on B‐Trees. These structures maintain sorted data that are very quick to search, but
also allowing for efficient insertions and deletions.
Alternate Data Streams: Alternate data streams (ADS) are the name provided for forks in
NTFS. Forks allow more than one single data stream to be associated with a filename.
Generally ADS are not listed in Windows explorer when viewing the contents of a directory.
Only the primary data stream is visible. Forensic tools will present the alternate data stream
in addition to the primary stream.
The ADS functionality was initially created for compatibility with Macintosh resource
forks. The most commonly encountered use of these is for downloaded files. Internet
Explorer began to create a Zone.Identifier ADS for every file downloaded from the web.
This provided the URL from which the content was downloaded. It meant that other
software was warned that the file was from the web and possibly untrustworthy. Other
browsers have followed suit since. From an investigative perspective ADS can be used to
hide information.
Journaling: NTFS is a journaling file system. The journal is available through the special
system file ($LogFile). NTFS journals record metadata changes to the file system. The use
of journaling made NTFS more fault tolerant than previous file systems.
Sparse Files: A sparse file contains many clusters of empty space in the file. Most file
systems will store these zero'd clusters as part of the file's contents. In NTFS, on the other
hand, these empty regions are not actually stored on the disk. They are recorded in the
metadata structures but the space can be used for other files.

Compression: Compression in NTFS is implemented at the file system level. Folders (or
files) can be marked as compressed. Any file that is moved to a compressed folder will
automatically be compressed. Compression is achieved using algorithms that are based on
the LZ77 compression algorithm.
Encryption: Certain server versions of Windows allow for the encryption of files. Files are
encrypted using a file encryption key which is used for symmetric encryption. This
symmetric key is encrypted using asymmetric encryption with the public key held in an
alternate data stream and the private key available from the logged in user details.
Access Control Lists: NTFS uses security descriptors to define the owner. Each security
descriptor contains two access control lists (ACLs). The discretionary access control list
(DACL) defines the actions (read, write, etc.) that are allowed/forbidden for each
user/group. The system access control list (SACL) defines the activities that should be
logged.
The remainder of this chapter firstly examines the on‐disk structure of NTFS (Section 7.1),
before proceeding to introduce the basic analysis methods used for the NTFS file system
(Section 7.2). This section will show the reader how digital forensic tools recover files from
NTFS file systems. Finally the reader is introduced to some advanced concepts in the analysis of
NTFS (Section 7.3) such as file deletion, fragmented files, alternate data streams and large MFT
records.
7.1 On‐Disk Structures
The NTFS file system consists of a number of system files which are summarised in Table 7.1.
With one exception the location of these files is not defined. They may appear anywhere in the
file system. Their location is determined from the Master File Table (MFT), which keeps a record
of all metadata/content location information. The one exception is the $Boot file, which is always
found in Sector 0.

Table 7.1 Special files in NTFS.
MFT
#
Name
Description
0
$MFT
This is the Master File Table (MFT) which contains an entry for every file in
the NTFS file system. It is the most important structure in terms of NTFS
forensic analysis.
1
$MFTMirr The MFT Mirror mirrors the first cluster of the MFT itself.
2
$Logfile
Contains a journal which logs metadata changes. Information can be
recovered from $Logfile in relation to previous states of the file system.
3
$Volume
Contains volume information such as the label, identifier and version.
4
$AttrDef
Contains information about the attributes used in the MFT such as names,
identifiers and sizes.
5
.
Contains the file system's root directory.
6
$Bitmap
This structure contains the allocation status (used or unused) of every cluster
in the file system.
7
$Boot
Contains the boot sector and boot code, often called the Volume Boot Record
(VBR). This is the only file with a guaranteed position, always occurring in
sector 0. $Boot is used to locate the first cluster of $MFT.
8
$BadClus Contains a list of clusters that have bad sectors.
9
$Secure
Contains information about security and access control for files.
10
$Upcase
Contains the Uppercase version of every unicode character.
11
$Extend
A directory that contains file system extensions which have no reserved MFT
record number.
7.1.1 $Boot
The $Boot metadata file is the only file on the NTFS file system for which the position is known.
This file always occupies sector 0 on the device. The $Boot file serves an identical purpose to
that of the volume boot record in FAT/ExFAT, and indeed the $Boot file is often referred to as the
volume boot record or VBR for NTFS.
$Boot is 
 bytes (one sector) in size. It contains bootstrap code and information about the
volume structure. Table 7.2 provides the structure of $Boot. The $Boot file is the first step in the
analysis of an NTFS file system. From a digital forensics perspective, the most important aspect
of this structure is that it allows the location of $MFT to be determined. From $MFT all files on
the file system can be recovered. $Boot also provides other information vital to further analysis
such as the cluster size (a combination of sector size and sectors per cluster) and the $MFT
record size. The remainder of the first sector in the file system is composed of the bootstrap code
itself.

Table 7.2 NTFS $Boot structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x03 Jump
Jump instruction to access the boot strap code.
0x03
0x08 OEM Name
The original equipment manufacturer name. Always “NTFS”.
0x0B 0x02 Sector Size
The sector size in bytes. This is generally 0x200 (
) bytes.
0x0D 0x01 Sectors/Cluster
The number of sectors per cluster. This is always a power of two.
0x0E
0x02 Reserved
Reserved Sectors. Must be zero.
0x10
0x03 Reserved
Zero'd.
0x13
0x02 Unused
Unused.
0x15
0x01 Media
Descriptor
The type of media on which the file system is resident. This is
generally 0xF8 for standard hard drives.
0x16
0x02 Reserved
Zero'd.
0x18
0x02 Sectors/Track
The number of sectors per physical track. This value is related to
the old format CHS addressing in disks.
0x1A 0x02 # Heads
The number of heads on the disk. This value is related to the old
format CHS addressing.
0x1C 0x04 Hidden Sectors
Meaning uncertain.
0x20
0x04 Unused
Unused.
0x24
0x04 Unused
Unused.
0x28
0x08 # Sectors
The total number of sectors on the device.
0x30
0x08 MFT Location
The logical cluster number for the first cluster of the $MFT file.
0x38
0x08 MFTMirr
Location
The logical cluster number for the first cluster of the $MFTMirr
file.
0x40
0x01 MFT Record
Size
A two's complement number. A positive number represents the
MFT record size in bytes. In the case of a negative number, x, the
MFT record size is given by 
 bytes.
0x41
0x03 Unused
Unused.
0x44
0x01 Clusters/Index
Num. clusters in the index buffer.
0x45
0x03 Unused
Unused.
0x48
0x08 Serial Number
The volume serial number.
0x50
0x04 Unused
Unused.
7.1.2 Indexes
Indexes are used to store groups of attributes in a sorted order. One of the most commonly
encountered index structures in NTFS is the directory. In this case a number of $FILENAME
attributes (Section 7.1.6) are stored in the index. NTFS uses a B‐Tree structure for storing
indexes. A B‐Tree is a self‐balancing tree data structure which is often encountered in modern
file systems. B‐Trees are composed of nodes which are linked in a hierarchical manner. Each B‐

Tree has a top‐level, head node, which has two or more children.2 Internal nodes have a parent
and two or more children, while leaf nodes have a parent and zero children.
Index structures (i.e. B‐Trees) provide a large performance advantage over linear storage
structures (such as FAT directory entries) as they are much quicker to search. B‐Trees allow for
searching, insertion and deletion in logarithmic time. Consider the sample B‐Tree shown in
Figure 7.1,3 and a search for the value 
.
Figure 7.1 A sample B‐Tree structure showing the three nodes that are examined in order to find
the value 
.
The head node contains the value 
 which is less than the desired value. This means that, if
present in the tree, the value 
 must be in the right child of the head node. Examining this node
shows that value to be 
 which is larger than the target. This results in the left child being
searched. This node contains the desired value. Compare this to a linear data structure such as:
This would require six checks to locate the value 
 as opposed to three checks in the B‐Tree.
In general B‐Trees nodes can hold more than one single value in each node unlike the tree shown
in Figure 7.1. Figure 7.2 provides a more accurate interpretation of a B‐Tree that might be
encountered in NTFS (or indeed in any modern file system). This B‐Tree is being used to store
file names, with each node being able to store a maximum of three values.

Figure 7.2 A sample B‐Tree structure with filenames as values. Similar to that seen in many file
systems.
While searching is an extremely efficient operation insertion and deletion sometimes require the
tree to be re‐structured. This restructuring will sometimes overwrite old data (i.e. deleted file
names for instance).
Indexes are stored in $INDEX_ROOT and $INDEX_ALLOCATION attributes (see Section
7.1.6). In the case of small indexes they will use the resident $INDEX_ROOT attribute, while
large indexes use $INDEX_ALLOCATION, a non‐resident attribute. Each index entry consists
of a header and an attribute (e.g. $FILENAME for directories). The processing of these attributes
(and all indexes) is shown later in this chapter (Section 7.2.3).
7.1.3 Fixup Arrays
NTFS uses a concept of fixup arrays (also called the Update Sequence Array) to increase
reliability. The final two bytes in each sector of a metadata structure (such as an MFT record) are
replaced with a signature. When the structure is accessed these signatures can be checked to
ensure that all sectors are components of the same metadata structure. Figure 7.3 shows an NTFS
metadata structure before and after applying fixup values.

Figure 7.3 An original NTFS metadata structure (top) and the same metadata structure after the
application of fixup values (bottom).
In Figure 7.3, before the application of the fixup values, we see that the first sector's final two
bytes are 0x1234 and the second sector's final two bytes are 0xCDEF. The fixup array portion of
the structure is zero'd. In order to apply the fixup values, the following steps occur:
1. The signature value is increased (it becomes 0x0001)
2. The final two bytes of the first sector are stored in the first position in the fixup array
3. The signature is written to the final two bytes of the first sector (0x0001)
4. Steps 2 and 3 are repeated for each sector in the structure.
In order to interpret these fixup arrays it is necessary to first process the fixup array itself. Note
an MFT record is used as an example in this case. The offset to the fixup array is given by two
bytes at 0x04 in the $MFT header and the length of the fixup array is given in the subsequent two
bytes. The Fixup Array begins with an update sequence number (the signature in Figure 7.3) and
is followed by the actual fixup values themselves. Listing 7.1 shows an excerpt from an MFT
Record (note some content has been removed for presentation purposes).

From Listing 7.1 we see that the Fixup Array is located at offset 0x30 and contains 0x03
elements. Each element is two bytes in size. The fixup array itself is also highlighted. The first
element in the array is the signature (0x1D00), while the remaining elements are the original
values that were replaced with the signature. At the end of each sector in the MFT Record, the
last two bytes have been replaced with the signature value. This signature values show that the
two sectors in question are linked!
Forensic tools that support NTFS will include an ability to process these values, replacing the
signature values with the original content during analysis. This concept is applicable in many
metadata files in NTFS and as such is important to understand.
7.1.4 Time in NTFS
Most time values in NTFS are stored as 64‐bit signed values, counting the number of 100 ns (
 s) intervals since 1 January 1601. All of these time values are stored in the UTC+0
timezone. When encountering these values there are a number of online converters that can be
used to process the values. Listing 7.2 shows a means of getting the human‐readable time for a
particular Windows Filetime value: 0x1D7FED75319AEB1 (
).
The Unix epoch time counts the number of seconds since 1 January 1970. In order to convert
Windows filetime values to a human‐readable format the date command can be used. The date
command operates on Unix time stamps, so the Windows filetime value must first be converted
to Unix time. This is a two‐step process. Firstly the Windows time value must be converted from
100ns intervals to seconds. This requires division by 
. The result of this
calculation is the number of seconds since 1601. The second step is to remove the number of
seconds between 1601 and 1970, in other words, to shift the epoch. This entails subtracting the
value 
 from the first result. The combination of these steps results in the
Unix time‐equivalent value. The process (including the date command) is shown in Listing 7.2.

7.1.5 Master File Table
The Master File Table ($MFT) is one of the most important structures in NTFS. $MFT contains
information about all files and directories in the file system. It is the structure that is processed
by forensic tools when they wish to list files in a file system, recover file metadata and also
recover file content. Not only does $MFT contain information about user‐created files, it always
contains entries for all of the NTFS system files (including $MFT itself!)
$MFT is composed of a number of MFT records, at least one per file. The structure of each
record is shown in Figure 7.4. Each record begins with a record header and is followed by a
number of attributes. Attributes are composed of header and data components. The data for an
attribute can be resident (stored inside the MFT Record itself) or non‐resident (stored somewhere
else in the file system). In the case of non‐resident data the attribute will contain a pointer to the
location of said non‐resident data. Generally each MFT record is 
 bytes; however, this
should be confirmed in $Boot.
Figure 7.4 MFT record structure.
From a forensic perspective, notice that there is often unused (slack) space at the end of an MFT
Record. This provides the potential for partial recovery of old MFT entries. The attributes in
NTFS include the following (note that the attribute‐type identifier is provided in brackets):
$STANDARD_INFORMATION (0x10): This attribute contains the metadata associated
with a file. This includes MACB times, owner, security information, etc. This is of vital
importance for recovering metadata for forensics.
$ATTRIBUTE_LIST (0x20): Used in the case that a file needs multiple MFT Records. If
present it points to other locations at which the remaining attributes will be found.
$FILE_NAME (0x30): This contains the file name for the file/directory in question. Note
that there can be multiple $FILE_NAME attributes, in the case of hard links or long file
names. There are also timestamps present in this attribute.
$OBJECT_ID (0x40): This is a unique identifier for a file that allows tracking of a file
even if the file name changes (or even if it is moved between systems). This is only
available in later versions of NTFS.
$SECURITY_DESCRIPTOR (0x50): Security properties/access control lists for the file.
$VOLUME_NAME (0x60): This contains the volume name for a file system and is
generally found only in MFT record 3 ($VOLUME).
$VOLUME_INFORMATION (0x70): File system version information is found in this
structure. This attribute is also found only in MFT record 3 ($VOLUME).
$DATA (0x80): This is another vital attribute for digital forensics, as this attribute tells us
how to find the file content! As stated previously this can be resident (for very small files) in

which case the content is stored in the MFT record itself, or non‐resident, in which case
$DATA will provide us with the location of the content. Files in NTFS can have multiple
$DATA attributes for a number of reasons. One of these is due to the possibility of Alternate
Data Streams (ADS), a separate piece of data independent of the actual file content.
$INDEX_ROOT (0x90): This is a B‐Tree node used to locate other nodes in a B‐Tree.
These are used for storing files in directories.
$INDEX_ALLOCATION (0xA0): In the case that there is insufficient space to store
information in the $INDEX_ROOT structure, $INDEX_ALLOCATION is used to allocate
extra clusters to the structure.
$BITMAP (0xB0): A bitmap structure which informs on cluster allocation status.
$REPARSE_POINT (0xC0): These are soft links, pointers to other files in the MFT.
$EA_INFORMATION (0xD0): Used for implementing OS24 extended attributes for
backwards compatibility.
$EA (0xE0): Used for implementing OS2 extended attributes for backwards compatibility.
$LOGGED_UTILITY_STREAM (0x100): Contains keys and information about
encrypted attributes in recent versions of NTFS.
The above attributes will be covered in more detail later in this section.
7.1.6 MFT Record Structure
Figure 7.4 provided a graphical view of the MFT record structure. This consists of an MFT
record header followed by a number of attributes. Attributes consist of header and data sections.
The attribute can be resident, in which case the data is stored in the MFT record itself, or non‐
resident, in which case the data is stored at another location in the file system. Resident and non‐
resident attributes have independent headers.
7.1.6.1 MFT Record Header
The MFT record header structure is a 
 byte structure found at the beginning of every MFT
record. The structure of this record header is shown in Table 7.3.

Table 7.3 MFT record header structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Signature
The MFT record signature value (FILE).
0x04
0x02 Fixup Array
Offset
The offset to the fixup array.
0x06
0x02 Fixup Array
Size
The number of entries in the fixup array.
0x08
0x08 LSN
$LOGFILE sequence number.
0x10
0x02 Sequence
Value
The number of times this MFT record has been reused.
0x12
0x02 Link Count
The number of links to this file.
0x14
0x02 First Attribute
Offset
The byte offset to the first attribute in the record.
0x16
0x02 Flags
Record Flags: 0x01 ‐ Record in Use; 0x02 Directory.
0x18
0x04 Record Size
(used)
The actual size of the MFT record in bytes.
0x1C 0x04 Record Size
(alloc)
The allocated size of the MFT record in bytes. This is generally
the same as that in the $Boot structure for MFT record size.
0x20
0x08 File Reference File reference to base record.
0x28
0x02 Next Attribute
ID
The ID for the next attribute in the record. This is one more than
the current number of attributes in the record.
Every attribute begins with a 16‐byte header. This is followed by information on where the
attribute data can be encountered. There are two possibilities: either the data is resident or non‐
resident. Resident data is located in the actual MFT record itself, whereas non‐resident data is
found in other locations in the file system. Table 7.4 provides the attribute header structure.
Table 7.4 Attribute header structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Attribute
Type
The attribute type identifier (see Section 7.1.5 for the list of
attributes (with identifiers)).
0x04
0x04 Attribute Size Attribute size in bytes.
0x08
0x01 Non‐Resident
Flag
This flag is 0x01 when an attribute is non‐resident, and 0x00 for
resident attributes.
0x09
0x01 Name Length Length of the attribute name in bytes.
0x0A 0x02 Name Offset
Offset to the attribute name in bytes.
0x0C 0x02 Flags
Flags relating to the attribute. Some flags include: 0x0001
(compressed); 0x4000 (encrypted) and 0x8000 (sparse).
0x0E
0x02 Attribute ID
An ID number unique to this attribute in this MFT record.

The attribute header is followed by a secondary header. The structure of this is dependent on
whether the attribute is resident or non‐resident. The structure of the resident attribute header is
shown in Table 7.5 and the non‐resident attribute header in Table 7.6.
Table 7.5 Resident attribute header structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x10 Common
Header
The common attribute header (see Table 7.4)
0x10
0x04 Content Size
The size of the attribute content in bytes.
0x14
0x02 Content
Offset
The offset to the start of the attribute data in bytes. This offset is
relative to the start of the attribute.
Table 7.6 Non‐resident attribute header structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x10 Common
Header
The common attribute header (see Table 7.4).
0x10
0x08 Starting VCN
The starting virtual cluster number (VCN) of the runlist (in other
words the position in the file content that this run list represents).
0x18
0x08 Ending VCN
The ending VCN of the runlist.
0x20
0x02 Runlist Offset
The location of the runlist relative to the start of the attribute.
0x22
0x02 Compression
Unit
Compression algorithm used.
0x24
0x04 Unused
Unused.
0x28
0x08 Allocated Size The allocated size of the attribute content.
0x30
0x08 Actual Size
The actual size of the attribute content.
0x38
0x08 Initialised Size The initialised size of the attribute content.
Resident attribute headers allow the direct location of the resident attribute data to be determined
by providing a byte offset to the beginning of the data and the size of the data in bytes. Non‐
resident attributes are slightly more complex when locating the actual data. The key component
in data location in a non‐resident attribute is the runlist. The non‐resident attribute header
structure provides the offset to the runlist, relative to the start of the attribute (see Table 7.6). The
run list itself is a variable length (null terminated) structure. As the name suggests a run list is
composed of one or more runs. Each run provides the starting cluster and number of clusters in
which the data can be located.
Run lists are themselves composed of three parts. The first part (one single byte) describes the
structure of the run list. The second part provides the number of clusters in the run and the third
provides the starting cluster of the run list. The final two parts of the run list structure are
variable length. The first byte informs the analyst of the length of each part. Consider the runlist
0x21112001 as shown in Figure 7.5.

Figure 7.5 A sample run list. The first byte describes the structure which is followed by the
number of clusters and the starting cluster.
The first byte describes the structure. The high‐order nibble of this byte provides the number of
bytes used in the starting cluster, while the low‐order nibble provides the number of bytes used to
store the number of contiguous clusters in the run. This is followed by the number of contiguous
clusters in the run. The length of this value is identified by the low‐order nibble in the first byte.
This is 0x11 (
) in Figure 7.5. Finally the starting cluster is found. The length of this value is
determined by the high‐order nibble in the first byte. In Figure 7.5 the value of the starting
cluster is 0x120 (
).
7.1.6.2 Browsing Attributes
Generally when processing an MFT record it is necessary to process all of the attributes present.
The method for doing this is as follows:
1. Process the MFT record header (Table 7.3) and locate the offset to the first attribute.
2. Process the common attribute header for attribute 1 and find the length of the attribute.
Extract this content (this is attribute 1)
3. Repeat step 2 (using the attribute length to move to the start of the next attribute). This
process is shown in Listing 7.3 for a sample MFT record.
In Listing 7.3 the offset to the first attribute is given as 0x38 bytes. At this offset begins the
attribute header for the first attribute. The first four bytes of this header determine the attribute
type. In this case the value is 0x10 (which is the $STANDARD_INFORMATION attribute – see
Section 7.1.5). The next four bytes contain the length of this attribute (0x48 bytes). Moving
forward 0x48 bytes will find the start of the next attribute. This process continues as described.
The results of this process are shown in Table 7.7.

Table 7.7 The attributes and their lengths from the MFT record in Listing 7.3.
Attribute Type Attribute Name
Length
0x10
$STANDARD_INFORMATION 0x48
0x30
$FILENAME
0x70
0x50
$SECURITY_DESCRIPTOR
0x68
0x80
$DATA
0x48
7.1.6.3 $STANDARD_INFORMATION (0x10)
Much of the metadata in NTFS is stored in the $STANDARD_INFORMATION attribute. The
structure of this is shown in Table 7.8. This attribute is always resident. As such the common
header (Table 7.4) will be followed by the resident header structure (Table 7.5).

Table 7.8 The $STANDARD_INFORMATION attribute structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x08 Creation Time
The time at which the file was created.
0x08
0x08 Modification
Time
The time at which the file's contents were modified.
0x10
0x08 MFT Change
Time
The time at which the file's metadata was last modified.
0x18
0x08 Access Time
The time at which the file was last accessed.
0x20
0x04 Flags
This provides information about the file referenced by this MFT
record. The flag values are found in Table 7.9.
0x24
0x04 Max. # Versions The maximum number of versions.
0x28
0x04 Version
Number
The current version number.
0x2C 0x04 Class ID
The class ID.
0x30
0x04 Owner ID
The owner ID (Not always present).
0x34
0x04 Security ID
The security ID mapping to $SECURE (not to a Windows SID).
0x38
0x08 Quota Changed Quota change.
0x40
0x08 USN
The Update Sequence Number (USN) (not always present).
Table 7.9 Flag values for the $STANDARD_INFORMATION attribute.
Value
Description Value
Description
0x0001 Read‐Only
0x0200 Sparse File
0x0002 Hidden
0x0400 Reparse Point
0x0004 System
0x0800 Compressed
0x0020 Archive
0x1000 Offline
0x0040 Device
0x2000 Content not indexed
0x0080 Normal
0x4000 Encrypted
0x0100 Temporary
$STANDARD_INFORMATION contains the file timestamps. NTFS records MACB
timestamps, modification, access, change and birth (creation). These values are Windows 64 bit
timestamps which can be converted as shown in Section 7.1.4.
7.1.6.4 $ATTRIBUTE_LIST (0x20)
In the case in which the attributes for the MFT record will not fit into a single MFT record, there
exists the $ATTRIBUTE_LIST attribute which will provide the locations of other attributes.
$ATTRIBUTE_LIST may be resident or non‐resident. The contents of $ATTRIBUTE_LIST are
a list of 
 byte structures each of which follows the structure shown in Table 7.10. Section
7.3.5 provides an example of an MFT record that uses $ATTRIBUTE_LIST.

Table 7.10 $ATTRIBUTE_LIST structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Attribute
Type
The attribute‐type identifier for the specific attribute.
0x04
0x02 Entry
Length
The size of this structure in bytes.
0x06
0x01 Name
Length
The size of the name in bytes.
0x07
0x01 Name Offset The offset to the attribute name.
0x08
0x08 Starting
VCN
Used if the attribute requires multiple MFT entries to describe the
content.
0x10
0x08 File
Reference
File reference of where the attribute is located. The first four bytes
represent the MFT record number.
0x18
0x01 Attribute ID Attribute ID.
7.1.6.5 $FILENAME (0x30)
As the name suggests $FILENAME attributes store filenames for particular MFT records. Both
files and directories have at least one $FILENAME attribute. In addition to the filename these
attributes also store further MACB times. Similar to $STANDARD_INFORMATION these
timestamps are Windows filetime objects (100 ns intervals since 1 January 1601). The structure
of $FILENAME is provided in Table 7.11.

Table 7.11 $FILENAME attribute structure.
Offset Size
Name
Description
0x00
0x08 Parent MFT
MFT file reference of the parent directory.
0x08
0x08 Creation Time
Time at which the MFT record was created.
0x10
0x08 Modification
Time
Time at which the contents were modified.
0x18
0x08 Change Time
Time at which the MFT record was changed.
0x20
0x08 Access Time
Time at which the contents were last accessed.
0x28
0x08 Allocated Size
The space, in bytes, allocated on disk to store this file.
0x30
0x08 Actual Size
The actual file size in bytes.
0x38
0x04 Flags
Flags (same as those in $STANDARD_INFORMATION – see
Table 7.9).
0x3C 0x04 Reparse Value
Reparse value.
0x40
0x01 Name Length
(n)
The number of UTF‐16 characters in the name (
 provides
the number of bytes for the name).
0x41
0x01 Name Space
The namespace type. Valid values are:
0x00: POSIX – case sensitive unicode;
0x01: Win32 – Unicode case insensitive;
0x02: DOS – Case insensitive, no special characters, 8.3 format
required; and
0x03: Win32/DOS – Original name fits DOS standard and two
names are not required.
0x42
Name
The actual name (in UTF‐16 encoding).
An interesting item in relation to the $FILENAME attribute is that this is the attribute that is used
to determine file size. In order to recover the complete file content this attribute must be
consulted along with the $DATA attribute. $DATA provides the location of the file's data while
$FILENAME provides the actual file size. Also, unlike other file systems, NTFS contains a
second set of timestamps in relation to each file in the $FILENAME attribute. These timestamps
are related to the filename itself and are generally updated when files are created, moved,
renamed, etc., rather than when content is modified or accessed.
7.1.6.6 $OBJECT_ID (0x40)
The $OBJECT_ID (OID) attribute is used by the distributed link tracking service in Windows
which is used to locate a file even after it has been moved or renamed. $OBJECT_ID contains an
Universally Unique IDentifier (UUID) for each file created on the system. These are indexed in
the system file $Extend
$ObjID which allows the files to be located even after
renaming/moving.
The $OBJECT_ID attribute is always resident with a maximum size of 
 bytes. The structure
of $OBJECT_ID is shown in Table 7.12. Many modern implementations specify only the first

field in this structure. In other words it is now common to encounter $OBJECT_ID attributes
which consist of a 
 byte Object ID and nothing else.
Table 7.12 $OBJECT_ID attribute structure. Note that often in recent Windows versions only the
first 
 bytes are used.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x10 OID
UUID
The Object ID for the item in question. This value should be unique for
each item on the file system. Note that this uniqueness property should
hold for network file systems also, meaning that it might cover more
than one device.
0x10
0x10 Birth
VID
The UUID of the volume on which this item was originally created. This
should not change during the object's lifetime, even if it is moved to a
different system.
0x20
0x10 Birth
OID
The original OID of the item. The OID might change if an item is moved
to a different system but this birth OID should always remain constant.
0x30
0x10 Domain
ID
The UUID for the domain on which the item was created. This is
generally unused.
The $OBJECT_ID attribute is created as part of the Distributed Link Tracking Service in
Windows. As such it will generally not be found when files are created/opened on other
operating systems. The attribute is created only when a file is created or opened using Windows.
The majority of operations (e.g. moving and renaming) will preserve the OID value but copying
the file will alter it. This is due to the creation of a new item from the copy which cannot have
the same OID as the original item.
OID values are generated following a specific pattern. Consider the OID shown in Listing 7.4.
This is composed of three components. The first eight bytes represent the time at which the item
was created. The next two bytes are a counter, while the final six bytes are the MAC address of
the computer on which the item was created. This can be used to link a file to a specific
computer; however, this information could be spoofed. If no MAC address is present a random
value is used instead.
The time that is used in the $OBJECT_ID is not the same as that used in the rest of NTFS. In this
case time is a 
 bit value which counts the number of 
ns intervals since 1 January 1582.
In order to convert the little‐endian 
 bit value in Listing 7.4 the first step is to convert to big‐
endian and drop the most significant nibble (i.e. the most significant 
 bits). From Listing 7.4
this results in 0x1EC7834E444F847. The next step is to subtract the number of 
ns intervals
between 1582 and 1601 (the start of traditional NTFS time). This value is 0x146BF33E42C000
which results in 0x1D80C4196023847. This can be converted using the method shown
previously. Converting this value to a human‐readable format results in Tuesday, 18 January
2022 8:01:23 AM.

7.1.6.7 $SECURITY_DESCRIPTOR (0x50)
$SECURITY_DESCRIPTOR attributes are generally encountered only in the $SECURE file
rather than in MFT records. The attribute may be resident or non‐resident. Structurally the
attribute's data is composed of a 0x14 byte header, followed by two ACLs: one, the SACL for
auditing purposes and the other, DACL for permissions. Each ACL is composed of one or more
Access Control Entries (ACE) and SID pairs. The attribute's data is finalised with two security
identifiers (SID) representing the owner and the group. The $SECURITY_DESCRIPTOR
attribute header structure is shown in Table 7.13.
Table 7.13 $SECURITY_DESCRIPTOR attribute header structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x01 Revision
Revision Number.
0x01
0x01 Padding
Padding Byte (0x00).
0x02
0x02 Control Flags
Control Flags.
0x04
0x04 User SID Offset
Byte offset to the User SID.
0x08
0x04 Group SID Offset Byte offset to the Group SID.
0x0C 0x04 SACL Offset
Byte offset to the SACL.
0x10
0x04 DACL Offset
Byte offset to the DACL.
All offsets provided in Table 7.13 are relative to the start of the attribute's data. The header
contains information on the locations of the User and Group Security Descriptors (SID) and also
the offset to the System and Discretionary ACLs.
The SID uniquely identifies a user (or group) in the Windows operating system and can be used
by NTFS to show ownership of a file. The SID is a variable length structure which is shown in
Table 7.14. Each SID comprised of a minimum of two components (the version and authority ID)
and any number of optional subauthority IDs. In Windows SIDs are written in a particular
pattern, an example of this is S‐1‐5‐32‐544.5 The letter S merely identifies the following value as
an SID. Next is the revision level (1) which is followed by an identifier authority (5 ‐
SECURITY_NT_AUTHORITY),6 and two subauthority values (32 and 544).
Table 7.14 The Security ID (SID) structure.
Offset Size
Name
Description
0x00
0x01
Version
The version is the first component of the SID (and is generally
1). S‐ is added before the version for presentation purposes.
0x01
0x01
Sub‐Auth Count
(n)
The number of subauthorities that are present in this SID.
0x02
0x06
Authority ID
The authority ID, i.e. the X is S‐1‐X.
0x08
0x04
 4
SubAuthority[]
Each four‐byte element in this array is appended to the SID in
the order in which they are found in these fields.
Consider the SID shown in Listing 7.5. Alternate fields are underlined.

The resulting SID would appear as S‐1‐5‐32‐544. This is version 
, consisting of two
subauthorities. The main authority ID is 
, while the subauthorities are 
 and 
. In the
case of multiple subauthorities in an SID the final part is the relative ID (which should be unique
in the domain in question) while the other subauthorities represent the domain. Each domain
should have a unique subauthority value.
The next component of $SECURITY_DESCRIPTOR is that of the ACLs. The ACL structure is
shown in Table 7.15. There can be two types of ACL, the SACL and the DACL. The DACL
defines the users/groups and the actions that they are permitted to perform on the item. The
SACL on the other hand defines the attempted actions that should be logged in the Windows
event log.
Table 7.15 Access control list (ACL) structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x01 ACL Revision Revision number associated with the ACL.
0x01
0x01 Padding
Padding.
0x02
0x02 ACL Size
The size of the ACL in bytes.
0x04
0x02 ACE Count
The number of ACEs in the ACL.
0x06
0x02 Padding
Padding.
Each ACL consists of a list of Access Control Entries (ACE). Each ACE specifies the access
rights which should be permitted/disallowed (or logged in the case of an ACE in the SACL) for a
particular user/group. Note that if there is no DACL present the system will grant full rights to all
users but if a DACL is present which contains no ACEs the system will deny all rights to all
users. The ACE structure is shown in Table 7.16.
Table 7.16 Access control entry (ACE) structure.
Offset Size
Name
Description
0x00
0x01
Type
Describes the permission represented by the ACE. Valid values
include 0x00 – Access Allowed; 0x01 – Access Denied; and 0x02 – 
System Audit.
0x01
0x01
Flags
ACE flags.
0x02
0x02
ACE
Size
The size of the ACE in bytes.
0x04
0x04
Access
Mask
The access mask defines the types of access that are permitted.
0x08
Variable SID
The SID to which the ACE refers.
The access mask in the ACE is used to define the exact types of access that are permitted. The
access mask is a bit‐field structure as shown in Figure 7.6. The meanings of the object specific
access rights and the standard access rights are provided in Tables 7.17 and 7.18, respectively.

Figure 7.6 The Access Mask bit field structure.
Table 7.17 Object specific access mask bits.
Bit Meaning
0
FILE_READ_DATA/FILE_LIST_DIRECTORY
1
FILE_WRITE_DATA/FILE_ADD_FILE
2
FILE_APPEND_DATA/FILE_ADD_SUBDIRECTORY/FILE_CREATE_PIPE_INSTANCE
3
FILE_READ_EA/FILE_READ_PROPERTIES
4
FILE_WRITE_EA/FILE_WRITE_PROPERTIES
5
FILE_EXECUTE (File)/FILE_TRAVERSE (Directory)
6
FILE_DELETE_CHILD
7
FILE_READ_ATTRIBUTES
8
FILE_WRITE_ATTRIBUTES
Table 7.18 Standard access mask bits.
Bit Meaning
16 DELETE
17 READ_CONTROL
18 WRITE_DAC
19 WRITE_OWNER
20 SYNCHRONIZE
The access mask bit field combined with the access type and the SID shows what actions certain
users are allowed/disallowed from performing.
7.1.6.8 $VOLUME_NAME (0x60)
$VOLUME_NAME is found only in the MFT record for the $VOLUME file (MFT record: 
).
This attribute contains the volume label which was assigned to the device at creation time.
Listing 7.6 shows a $VOLUME_NAME attribute. The attribute header, resident header and data
are highlighted.

The structure of this attribute's data is very simple, it is merely the UTF‐16 encoded volume
label. The offset to the data and the size of the data is found in the resident attribute header
($VOLUME_NAME is always resident). In Listing 7.6 the offset to the data is 0x18 and the data
is 0x0E bytes in size. The value of the volume label is “NTFS‐FS”.
7.1.6.9 $VOLUME_INFORMATION (0x70)
Similar to $VOLUME_NAME, $VOLUME_INFORMATION is another attribute that is found
only in the $VOLUME file (MFT record: 3). Listing 7.7 shows the contents of a sample
$VOLUME_INFORMATION attribute.
Again, this attribute is always resident and is 0x28 bytes in size. The resident header informs the
analyst that the data begins at 0x18 and is 0x0C bytes in length. The data is interpreted using
Table 7.19.
Table 7.19 The $VOLUME_INFORMATION attribute structure. The values are from Listing
7.7.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x08 Unused
Unused – generally zero'd.
0x00
0x08
0x01 FS Major Version The major version number of the file system. 0x03
0x09
0x01 FS Minor Version The minor version number of the file system 0x01
0x0A 0x02 Flags
Volume flags (see Table 7.20)
0x00
The combination of major/minor version in $VOLUME_INFORMATION is used to give some
indication of the file system's age. A version of 1.2 is generally created under Windows NT, 3.0 is
created under Windows 2000, while 3.1 is anything created since the time of Windows XP. Most
encountered NTFS file systems will have a version of 3.1.

Table 7.20 Flag values for the $VOLUME_INFORMATION attribute in NTFS.
Flag
Description
0x0001 Dirty
0x0002 Resize $Logfile
0x0004 Upgrade Volume next time
0x0008 Mounted in NT
0x0010 Deleting Change Journal
0x0020 Repair Object IDs
0x8000 Modified by chkdsk
7.1.6.10 $DATA (0x80)
The $DATA attribute is used to discover the location of file content. $DATA attributes can be
resident or non‐resident. They have no actual structure being fully dependent on the file's
content. The attribute is merely used to locate the content. In the case of a resident primary
$DATA attribute (for instance in the case of a very small file), the file's contents are found
directly in the MFT record itself, and therefore do not occupy any clusters on disk. Non‐resident
$DATA is located through the data run found in the non‐resident attribute header.
A single MFT record can contain multiple $DATA attributes. These are referred to as alternate
data streams and are generally named attributes (for instance the Zone.Identifier ADS mentioned
previously). Processing of these ADS is demonstrated in Section 7.3.4.
7.1.6.11 $INDEX_ROOT (0x90)
NTFS index structures are used to hold directory entries and are organised as B‐Trees. There are
two forms of index attribute, $INDEX_ROOT and $INDEX_ALLOCATION. In the case of
small index structures (for instance directories with only a small number of files) all of the items
are listed in the resident $INDEX_ROOT structure. In the case that the volume of data is too
large for a resident structure, the non‐resident $INDEX_ALLOCATION structure is used instead.
Listing 7.8 shows a sample $INDEX_ROOT attribute. The $INDEX_ROOT attribute is a named
attribute, the name is always $I30. The attribute's data is composed of a 
 byte
$INDEX_ROOT header, followed by a node header, followed by a sequence of directory entries.
These directory entries contain, among other things, a $FILENAME attribute which provides
information about each file in the directory.

Table 7.21 presents the structure of the $INDEX_ROOT header. The values included in this table
are taken from Listing 7.8. One of the most important pieces of information provided in the
header is the attribute type used in the index. In Table 7.21 the attribute type is 0x30 which is a
$FILENAME attribute. This is expected, as the $FILENAME attribute contains the file names
allowing for directory contents to be listed.
Table 7.21 $INDEX_ROOT header structure with values from Listing 7.8.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x04 Type
The type of attribute in the index.
0x30 (
)
0x04
0x04 Collation
The collation sorting rule to use.
0x01 (
)
0x08
0x04 Record Size The size of each index record in bytes.
0x1000 (
)
0x0C 0x01 Record Size The size of each index record in clusters. 0x01 (
)
0x0D 0x03 Unused
0x00 (
)
The $INDEX_ROOT header is immediately followed by the node header. This structure allows
the index entries to be located. The structure of the node header is provided in Table 7.22. The
values shown in this table are taken from Listing 7.8.

Table 7.22 $INDEX_ROOT node header structure with values from Listing 7.8.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x04 Index List
Offset
The byte offset to the start of the Index Entry List
(relative to the start of the node header)
0x10 (
)
0x04
0x04 Index End
Offset
The byte offset to the end of the Index Entry list (relative
to the start of the node header)
0xF0 (
)
0x08
0x04 Index Buffer
Offset
Offset to the end of the allocated index entry list buffer
(relative to the start of the node header)
0xF0 (
)
0x0C 0x04 Flags
0x00 (
)
The node header allows the first entry in the index to be located (0x10). The byte offset provided
is relative to the start of the node header. The type value from the $INDEX_ROOT header
determines the type of entry that is present. In this case these are $FILENAME attributes. A
quick glance at Listing 7.8 shows that two files are present, delete.txt and hills.jpg.
7.1.6.12 $INDEX_ALLOCATION (0xA0)
When the number of entries in an index is too large for the resident $INDEX_ROOT structure, a
non‐resident $INDEX_ALLOCATION structure is used instead. In this case the
$INDEX_ROOT attribute will still be present, along with the $INDEX_ALLOCATION attribute
and also a $BITMAP attribute which outlines the allocation status of the index records.
Each $INDEX_ALLOCATION attribute contains fixed‐size index records, each of which
contains a single tree node. The size of each index record is defined in the $INDEX_ROOT
structure.
Each record is composed of an index record header, followed by a node header and then a list of
entries. The node header follows the exact same structure as in the $INDEX_ROOT attribute
(Table 7.22). The index record header structure is given in Table 7.23.
Table 7.23 The index record header structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Signature
The index record header signature (INDX).
0x04
0x02 Fixup Offset The offset to the fixup array.
0x06
0x02 Fixup Size
The number of entries in the fixup array.
0x08
0x08 LSN
The Log File Sequence number.
0x10
0x10 VCN
The virtual cluster number of this record in the index stream.
7.1.6.13 $BITMAP (0xB0)
A bitmap (or allocation status) describes the allocation status of an item in a computer system. In
NTFS the $BITMAP attribute contains this information.7 The $Bitmap attribute is always found
in the MFT Record for $MFT itself. In this case the bitmap represents the allocation status of
individual MFT records. Listing 7.9 shows an extract from an allocation bitmap.

In a bitmap structure each item is represented by one single bit. A bit value of one means the item
is allocated while zero means that it is unallocated. The first byte represents items 0–7 (item zero
is represented by the least significant bit, while item 7 is represented by the most significant).
The second byte represents items 8–15, and so forth.
Consider the byte at offset 0x03 in Listing 7.9. This has the value 0x07 which, in binary, is
0b00000111. As it is the fourth byte in the bitmap it represents the allocation status of items 
–
. The three least significant bits are marked as being allocated which means that items 
, 
 and 
 are allocated while the remaining items represented by this byte are unallocated
(all have zero values).
7.1.6.14 $REPARSE_POINT (0xC0)
A reparse point provides a means of extending the NTFS file system. Reparse points consist of a
tag and data. The tag identifies the application/filter that should be applied to the data. Different
reparse point tags can be defined by an application/vendor, but there are some standard tags in
existence. These include symbolic links, directory junction points, volume mount points, etc.
Table 7.24 provides the structure for a $REPARSE_POINT attribute.
Table 7.24 The structure of $REPARSE_POINT attribute.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Reparse
Type
The type of reparse point being used.
0x04
0x02 Length (n) The length of the $REPARSE_POINT attribute's data (n).
0x06
0x02 Padding
Padding (zeros).
0x08
(n)
Data
The data for this $REPARSE_POINT. The structure of this is
dependent on the type of $REPARSE_POINT that is encountered.
The reparse type value is divided into three sub‐parts. The least significant 16d bits represent the
type of reparse point that is represented by the $REPARSE_POINT attribute. The following 
bits are reserved for future use, while the three most significant bits have a special meaning. Bit
, if set, informs the analyst that this $REPARSE_POINT is an alias for another system
object. Bit 
, if set, informs the analyst that accessing the first byte of data will be slow (for
instance if the data resides on an external tape drive). This is known as the high‐latency bit.
Finally, the most significant bit is commonly called the Microsoft bit. This is set when the tag is
owned by Microsoft. User‐defined tags must use 0 in this position.
Consider the reparse type value of 0xA0000003. The 
 least significant bits represent the
value 
, which provides the record type (junction/mount point in this case). The three most
significant bits have the value 0b101, meaning that this is a Microsoft tag and an alias to another
file system object.
The data is dependent on the $REPARSE_POINT attribute's type. In the case of a mount
point/junction (type: 0xA0000003) the structure of the data is shown in Table 7.25.

Table 7.25 The structure of $REPARSE_POINT attribute.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Target Name
Offset
The byte offset to the start of the target name relative to the end of
this structure (0x08 into the data/0x10 into the $REPARSE_POINT
attribute structure).
0x02
0x02 Target Name
Length (n)
The length of the target name in bytes.
0x04
0x02 Print Name
Offset
The byte offset to the start of the print name relative to the end of
this structure (0x08 into the data/0x10 into the $REPARSE_POINT
attribute structure).
0x06
0x02 Print Name
Length (p)
The length of the print name in bytes.
7.1.6.15 $EA_INFORMATION (0xD0) and $EA (0xE0)
The $EA_INFORMATION attribute along with the $EA attribute are used to implement
Extended Attributes from OS/2's HPFS file system. These attributes are rarely encountered;
hence, this section merely gives the structure of the attributes in Tables 7.26 and 7.27. Both
attributes can be resident or non‐resident.
Table 7.26 $EA_INFORMATION attribute structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Packed Size
Size of the packed extended attribute.
0x02
0x02 Num. EA
The number of extended attributes that have the NEED_EA flag
set.
0x04
0x04 Unpacked
Size
The unpacked size of the attribute.
Table 7.27 $EA attribute structure.
Offset
Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Next EA Offset
Offset to the next EA
0x04
0x01 Flags
Flags – 0x80: NEED_EA
0x05
0x01 Name Length (n) The length of the extended attribute name.
0x06
0x02 Value Length (v) The length of the extended attribute value.
0x08
(n)
Name
The name of the extended attribute.
0x08 + n (v)
Value
The value of the extended attribute.
While not generally used one of the most frequent instances in which extended attributes are
encountered is as a means of hiding malware. On the few occasions that these attributes are
encountered during an investigation, they may be of interest!

7.2 Analysis of NTFS
In this section the manual analysis of the NTFS file system is described. This section focuses on
the basic analysis techniques used to perform simple forensic tasks such as gathering file system
information, listing files and recovering file metadata and content. In the following section more
advanced NTFS analysis topics will be introduced.
7.2.1 Creating NTFS File Systems
Before commencing analysis it is necessary to create some sample NTFS file systems for
analysis. NTFS is generally encountered on system drives (on Windows systems); however, the
complexity of an entire system drive can provide some challenges for understanding manual
analysis. As with previous file systems a basic file system will be created for initial analysis.
Changes will be made to this initial file system to demonstrate more advanced topics in NTFS.
Listing 7.10 shows the command used to create an NTFS file system on Linux. In this example
only a volume label is specified.
7.2.2 Supplied NTFS Image Files
Throughout this chapter a number of NTFS disk images are used for demonstration purposes.
These images are available through the book's website. Table 7.28 summarises the available disk
images.
Table 7.28 NTFS disk images available from the book's website.
Image File
Description
NTFS_V1.E01 A basic NTFS file system which contains four files and one directory. One of
the files contains an alternate data stream.
NTFS_V2.E01 NTFS_V1.E01 with multiple hard links created to one file and two other files
deleted.
NTFS_V3.E01 This image contains a fragmented file.
7.2.3 NTFS Manual Analysis
There are a number of steps that must be performed in order to successfully analyse an NTFS file
system. These steps are described in detail subsequently in this section. The necessary steps are:
1. Process $Boot: In order to locate other file system structures (especially $MFT) and to
gather information about the file system as a whole it is necessary to process the $Boot
structure.

2. Recover $MFT: The master file table ($MFT) is the single most important file used in the
analysis of NTFS. It contains information about every single file in the file system. When it
is considered that everything in NTFS is a file this means this structure contains information
about all structures in the filesystem along with all user‐created files and directories.
3. Process Directories: Files can be listed by processing directories. This allows for all
content to be listed in the file system.
4. Recover Metadata: File metadata is stored in $MFT. The next step is to recover this
metadata for each file in the file system.
5. Recover Content: File content recovery is the final step in the analysis of NTFS.
7.2.3.1 Process $Boot
As with all file system forensic analysis tasks, analysis of NTFS begins by recovering
information about the file system as a whole. This will include the basic storage unit sizes
(sectors/clusters) and also the location of vital file system structures such as $MFT (and also
$MFTMirr in case of corruption of the primary $MFT). Sleuthkit provides the fsstat command to
provide this information automatically. Listing 7.11 shows the output of fsstat when executed on
the NTFS_V1.E01 disk image.

The output from fsstat is actually generated by processing two file system structures. The first
three sections (File System Information, Metadata Information and Content Information) are
generated from the $Boot file in NTFS which is examined in this section. The remaining section,
$AttrDef Attribute Values, is generated from the $AttrDef file. This file contains information
about all possible attributes in the NTFS file system. Listing 7.12 shows the contents of $Boot
from NTFS_V1.E01 while table 7.29 shows some of the processed values from $Boot.

Table 7.29 Processed values from $Boot structure in NTFS_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x03
0x08 OEM Name
NTFS
0x0B 0x02 Sector Size
0x200 (
)
0x0D 0x01 Sectors/Cluster
0x08 (
)
0x28
0x08 # Sectors
0x3FFFF (
)
0x30
0x08 MFT Location
0x04 (
)
0x38
0x08 MFTMirr Loc.
0x3FFF (
)
0x40
0x01 MFT Record Size 0xF6 (
)
(
)
0x48
0x08 Serial Number
0x2BEFA0611D6F5839
Comparing the output of fsstat (Listing 7.11) with the contents of Table 7.29 shows that much of
the information about the file system can be recovered from $Boot. For instance the OEM name
is present in this structure along with the sector and cluster sizes. The ranges for sectors and
clusters can be calculated from the information available. The total number of sectors is
; as numbering starts at 
 for all structures in NTFS this means that the range of
sectors is from 
 to 
 as fsstat shows.
There is no corresponding figure for the number of clusters; however, the number of sectors per
cluster (
) is provided. The total number of clusters can then be calculated using:
This provides 
 in this case. Again, as all numbering begins at 
, this results in a
cluster range of 
 to 
. Note also that in this example there are seven sectors at the
end of the device which do not belong to any cluster!
$Boot also provides information about the master file table. The $MFT structure's first cluster is
found in the $Boot structure. In Table 7.29 this value is 
; knowing the cluster size in this
image it is now possible to state that the $MFT's first cluster will be found at byte offset
. However, this provides only the first cluster of the $MFT file. In order
to recover the content of $MFT, the first $MFT record in this cluster should be processed. This
will allow the entire $MFT file to be recovered.8 $MFT is of such vital importance to the
operation of an NTFS file system that a mirror of the first cluster of the $MFT file is maintained.
The location of this can also be found in $Boot. According to Table 7.29 this can be found in
cluster 
.
The final piece of information required in order to proceed with analysis is that of MFT record
size. While this is generally 
 bytes, it can be altered during file system creation. The
value that is located in $Boot for this is 0xF6. This is a two's complement number (see Section
3.2.7) which has the value 
. As this is a negative number the MFT record size is 2, raised

to the power of the absolute value of this number. In other words the MFT record size is
 bytes.
7.2.3.2 Recover $MFT
After processing $Boot the next step is to recover the master file table. The first cluster of this
structure is obtained from $Boot along with the size of each MFT record. The very first MFT
record is always that of $MFT itself.9 From Table 7.29 the MFT record size is known to be
. Listing 7.13 shows the MFT record for $MFT from NTFS_V1.E01 (note that some
zero bytes at the end of the record have been removed). This record commences with the MFT
Record Header, following this alternate attributes highlighted.
Table 7.30 summarises the attributes that are present in the MFT record for $MFT. As expected
there is a $STANDARD_INFORMATION attribute present which will provide metadata about
the $MFT file itself. This is followed by a $FILENAME attribute. Examining the ASCII values
of the $FILENAME attribute in Listing 7.13 shows the name of this file to be, as expected,
$MFT. The final two attributes are $DATA and $BITMAP. The $DATA attribute will provide the
location of the file content and the $BITMAP attribute will tell which MFT records are in
use/free.

Table 7.30 The attributes discovered in the MFT record for $MFT in NTFS_V1.E01.
Type ID Name
Size
Resident
0x10
$STANDARD_INFORMATION 0x60 (
)
Yes
0x30
$FILENAME
0x68 (
) Yes
0x80
$DATA
0x48 (
)
No
0xB0
$BITMAP
0x48 (
)
No
In order to recover the entire contents of the MFT file itself the $DATA attribute must be
analysed. From Table 7.30 this attribute is seen to be non‐resident. The attribute itself is
presented in Listing 7.14. The attribute begins with the common attribute header followed by the
non‐resident header (highlighted). The processed headers are shown in Table 7.31.
Table 7.31 Partially processed non‐resident attribute header structure in the $MFT's $DATA
attribute.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x10 Common Header Type: 0x80 ($DATA)
Size: 0x48 (
)
Resident: No
Name Length: 0x00 (
)
Name Offset: 0x40 (
)
Flags: 0x00 (
)
Attribute ID: 0x01 (
)
0x10
0x08 Starting VCN
0x00 (
)
0x18
0x08 Ending VCN
0x12 (
)
0x20
0x02 Runlist Offset
0x40 (
)
0x28
0x08 Allocated Size
0x13000 (
)
0x30
0x08 Actual Size
0x11400 (
)
0x38
0x08 Initialised Size
0x11400 (
)
From Table 7.31 the following information is obtained.

This $DATA attribute represents the first 
 clusters of the file's content (the starting
VCN is cluster 0 and the ending VCN is 
).
The file has been allocated 
 clusters in total (the allocated space is 0x13000, while the
cluster size is 0x1000). Combining this with the previous point means that only one single
$DATA attribute is required for this file.
There is potentially some slack space at the end of the file. The allocated file is 0x13000 but
the actual file size is 0x11400. This means there is a potential for 0x1C00 bytes of slack
space at the end of the file.
The runlist can be found at offset 0x40 from the start of the attribute. The runlist is
0x111304.
In order to recover the content it is next necessary to interpret the run list content. Referring to
Figure 7.5 shows that in this case the number of bytes used for both the starting cluster and the
number of contiguous clusters is 
. This means that the run list represents 0x13 contiguous
clusters beginning at cluster 0x04. Listing 7.15 shows a dd command that can be used to extract
this file. The sleuthkit is also shown with both results compared based on their MD5 values.
Once $MFT has been recovered all information about the file system is now available to the
analyst. The process continues with the listing of all files/directories that are present in the file
system.
7.2.3.3 Process Directories
File listing begins from the root directory of any file system. In NTFS the root directory (.)
always has the MFT record number 5. In order to view the contents of this record five records
must be skipped (remember there is a record number 0!). The MFT record for record 5 is shown
in Listing 7.16. The record begins with the record header and is followed by the attributes
(alternate attributes highlighted). The attributes present in this are shown in Table 7.32.

Table 7.32 The attributes discovered in the MFT record for the root directory in NTFS_V1.E01.
Type ID Name
Length
Resident
0x10
$STANDARD_INFORMATION 0x48 (
) Yes
0x30
$FILENAME
0x60 (
) Yes
0x50
$SECURITY_DESCRIPTOR
0x48 (
) No
0x90
$INDEX_ROOT
0x58 (
) Yes
0xA0
$INDEX_ALLOCATION
0x50 (
) No
0xB0
$BITMAP
0x28 (
) Yes
In order to list the files/directories in a directory it is necessary to process the $INDEX_ROOT
and/or $INDEX_ALLOCATION attributes. The $INDEX_ROOT structure is found in all

directories and is always a resident attribute. In the case of small directories the actual directory
contents will be stored here. In larger directories where the $INDEX_ROOT structure is not
sufficiently large to store information about the files $INDEX_ALLOCATION is used to store
the relevant information. In the case that both $INDEX_ROOT and $INDEX_ALLOCATION
are present processing starts with $INDEX_ALLOCATION as this will contain the relevant data.
The $INDEX_ALLOCATION (Type: 0xA0) node from Listing 7.16 is shown again in Listing
7.17. The processed values from this are shown in Table 7.33.
Table 7.33 Partially processed values for the $INDEX_ALLOCATION attribute in the root
directory in NTFS_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x10 Common Header Type: 0xA0
($INDEX_ALLOCATION)
Size: 0x50 (
)
Resident: No
Name Length: 0x04 (
)
Name Offset: 0x40 (
)
Flags: 0x00 (
)
Attribute ID: 0x05 (
)
0x10
0x08 Starting VCN
0x00
0x18
0x08 Ending VCN
0x00
0x28
0x08 Allocated Size
0x1000 (
)
0x30
0x08 Actual Size
0x1000 (
)
0x38
0x08 Initialised Size
0x1000 (
)
The $INDEX_ALLOCATION attribute has a name associated with it. This name is found at
offset 0x40 and is 0x04 characters in size. These are UTF‐16‐encoded characters and as such
each character occupies two bytes. The values found at this location give the attribute name as
$I30. The runlist for the data content is found at offset 0x48, the value of which is
0x2101051000. This translates to a run consisting of one cluster starting at cluster 0x1005 (
). Listing 7.18 shows the contents of this location.

The directory contents are an index entry in an NTFS B‐Tree. In the case of small directories (as
is seen in this example) the actual files will be present (examining the ASCII values in Listing
7.18 will show file names); however, in larger directories this index record will point to other
tree nodes.
The data is composed of an index record header followed by a node header structure. The index
record header is 0x18 bytes in size while the node header is 0x10 bytes. The headers are followed
by an index list which is the actual list of $FILENAME attributes for each of the files/directories
contained in the directory. Listing 7.18 shows the index record header and the node header. Four
index list items are also included (alternate items are underlined). For presentation purposes
much of the intervening information has been removed. There are many other files in this
directory than those listed here! As an exercise the reader is asked to process the remaining files
and list the entire contents of the directory.

Processing of these entries is a three‐part process. Firstly the index header is processed which is
followed by the node header. Finally each individual entry is processed. The processing of the
index header is shown in Table 7.34.
Table 7.34 Processed index record header from Listing 7.18.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x04 Signature
INDX
0x04
0x02 Fixup Array Offset 0x28 (
)
0x06
0x02 Fixup Array Size
0x09 (
)
0x08
0x08 LSN
0x00 (
)
0x10
0x08 Current VCN
0x00 (
)
Every index record header begins with a signature value (INDX). The most interesting
information available in the header is the reference to the fixup array. This is located at offset
0x28 and contains 0x09 elements. Each element in the fixup array is two bytes in size. The fixup
array itself is shown in Listing 7.19.
The first element in the fixup array (0x5200) is the value which will be placed at the end of every
sector in this structure. The replacement values for the eight sectors are listed in the subsequent
byte pairs. Once the index record header has been processed the node header is next. This is
shown in Table 7.35.
Table 7.35 Processed node header from Listing 7.18.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x04 Index List Offset
0x28 (
)
0x04
0x04 Index List End Offset
0x600 (
)
0x08
0x04 Index List Buffer Offset 0xFE8 (
)
0x0C 0x04 Flags
0x00 (
)
The node header structure informs the analyst of the location of the directory entry list itself. The
index list offset is relative to the start of the node header. The value in Table 7.35 is 0x28,
meaning that the offset to the first directory entry is 0x28 + 0x18 = 0x40.
Table 7.36 shows the processed values for the four directory entries shown in Listing 7.18. As
expected in each of the four $FILENAME attributes that are processed the parent directory is
0x05, in other words the root directory. Note that the parent directory value is provided as an
MFT file reference. The most significant two bytes represent the sequence number (0x05) and
the least significant six bytes represent the MFT record number (0x05). Examining the MFT File
reference values for each individual file shows that the MFT record numbers for $AttrDef is
0x04 (
), Files is 0x41 (
), info.txt is 0x40 (
) and islands.jpg is 0x43 (
). This can

be compared with the output of fls (other files have been removed from the output) as shown in
Listing 7.20.
Examining the flag values in each $FILENAME attribute shows that $AttrDef is a hidden
system file, info.txt and islands.jpg are files and Files is a directory. The MFT record number
for Files is 0x40 (
). In order to continue listing files, it is necessary to extract this MFT
record and process this in the same manner as that shown for the root directory. This process
continues until there are no further files to be processed.
The listing of the remaining files in the root directory and the processing of the Files directory is
left as an exercise for the reader.

Table 7.36 Processed directory entries from Listing 7.18. Note that some values have been
truncated and others have been omitted for presentation purposes.
Offset Size
Name
Record 1 Value
Record 2 Value
0x00
0x08
MFT File Ref. 0x0004…0004
0x0001…0041
0x08
0x02
Entry Size
0x68 (
)
0x60 (
)
0x0A 0x02
Filename Size 0x52 (
)
0x4C (
)
0x0C 0x04
Flags
0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x10
(n)
$FILENAME —
—
$FILENAME attributes
0x00
0x08
Parent Dir.
0x0005…0005
0x0005…0005
0x28
0x08
Alloc. Size
0x1000 (
) 0x00 (
)
0x30
0x08
Actual Size
0x0A00 (
) 0x00 (
)
0x38
0x04
Flags
0x06
0x10000020
0x3C 0x04
Reparse Value 0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x40
0x01
Name Length 0x08 (
)
0x05 (
)
0x41
0x01
Name Space
0x03 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x42
(
) Name
$AttrDef
Files
Offset Size
Name
Record 3 Value
Record 4 Value
0x00
0x08
MFT File Ref. 0x0001…0040
0x0001…0043
0x08
0x02
Entry Size
0x68 (
)
0x68 (
)
0x0A 0x02
Filename Size 0x52 (
)
0x58 (
)
0x0C 0x04
Flags
0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x10
(n)
$FILENAME —
—
$FILENAME attributes
0x00
0x08
Parent Dir.
0x0005…0005
0x0005…0005
0x28
0x08
Alloc. Size
0xA8 (
)
0x41000 (
)
0x30
0x08
Actual Size
0xA6 (
)
0x40569 (
)
0x38
0x04
Flags
0x20
0x20
0x3C 0x04
Reparse Value 0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x40
0x01
Name Length 0x08(
)
0x0B (
)
0x41
0x01
Name Space
0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x42
(
) Name
info.txt
islands.jpg

7.2.3.4 Recover File Metadata
The primary structure for storing metadata in NTFS is $STANDARD_INFORMATION but
many other attributes can be used to provide information relevant to an investigation. Listing
7.21 shows the output from the istat command for the small info.txt file in NTFS_V1.E01. This
shows the complexity of information available in NTFS when compared to simpler file systems
such as FAT and ExFAT.
The istat output shows the areas in which metadata can be found. The first pieces of information
recovered are from the MFT record header. The command then proceeds to process the
$STANDARD_INFORMATION and $FILENAME attributes. Finally istat lists all the attributes
that are present in the record.
Listing 7.22 shows the contents of MFT record number 
 (info.txt). Alternate attributes are
highlighted. Tables 37–7.39 process this attribute showing the header,
$STANDARD_INFORMATION, and $FILENAME, respectively.

Processing the attribute header shows the location of the fixup array (offset 0x30, 0x03
elements). The value of the fixup array is 0x0500 0x6C61 0x0000. The actual size of the record
is 0x220 which is greater than a single sector (sector size is 0x200). This means the fixup array is
required. The fixup locations are not part of the actual space used by the metadata structure. The
header also informs the analyst that there is one link to this file and also that the MFT record has
 attributes (the next attribute ID value!). Most importantly the header informs the analyst that
the first attribute can be found at offset 0x38.

Table 7.37 The processed MFT record header for info.txt in NTFS_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x04 Signature
FILE
0x04
0x02 Fixup Array Offset
0x30 (
)
0x06
0x02 Fixup Array Size
0x03 (
)
0x08
0x08 LSN
0x00 (
)
0x10
0x02 Sequence Value
0x01 (
)
0x12
0x02 Link Count
0x01 (
)
0x14
0x02 First Attribute Offset 0x38 (
)
0x16
0x02 Flags
0x01 (
)
0x18
0x04 Record Size (used)
0x220 (
)
0x1C 0x04 Record Size (alloc)
0x400 (
)
0x20
0x08 File Reference
0x00 (
)
0x28
0x02 Next Attribute ID
0x04 (
)
When recovering metadata, tools process $STANDARD_INFORMATION as a matter of
priority. This contains the file creation, modification, change and access time values. Note that in
this example the $STANDARD_INFORMATION is not as long as it might be. Some of the
optional values are not present. Before processing any attribute it is important to check the
attribute size in the common attribute header.
Table 7.38 The processed $STANDARD_INFORMATION attribute in info.txt in
NTFS_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x08 Creation Time
0x01DA0BBC37FC6B1D
2023‐10‐31 05:36:38
0x08
0x08 Modification Time 0x01DA0BBC37FC8900
2023‐10‐31 05:36:38
0x10
0x08 MFT Change Time 0x01DA0BBC37FC8900
2023‐10‐31 05:36:38
0x18
0x08 Access Time
0x01DA0BBC37FC6B1D
2023‐10‐31 05:36:38
0x20
0x04 Flags
0x20 (Archive)
0x24
0x04 Max. # Versions
0x00 (
)
0x28
0x04 Version Number
0x00 (
)
0x2C 0x04 Class ID
0x00 (
)

Another attribute that contains much metadata is $FILENAME. This attribute contains
timestamps related to the filename itself. This attribute also provides the allocated and actual size
values for the attribute. Finally, as expected, $FILENAME also contains the file name itself.
Table 7.39 The processed $FILENAME attribute in info.txt in NTFS_V1.E01.
Offset Size
Name
Value
0x00
0x08
Parent MFT
Seq No: 0x05
MFT Rec. No: 0x05
0x08
0x08
Creation Time
0x01DA0BBC37FC6B1D
2023‐10‐31 05:36:38
0x10
0x08
Modification Time 0x01DA0BBC37FC6B1D
2023‐10‐31 05:36:38
0x18
0x08
Change Time
0x01DA0BBC37FC6B1D
2023‐10‐31 05:36:38
0x20
0x08
Access Time
0x01DA0BBC37FC6B1D
2023‐10‐31 05:36:38
0x28
0x08
Allocated Size
0xA8 (
)
0x30
0x08
Actual Size
0x00 (
)
0x38
0x04
Flags
0x20 (Archive)
0x3C 0x04
Reparse Value
0x00 (
)
0x40
0x01
Name Length (n)
0x08 (
)
0x41
0x01
Name Space
0x00 (
)
0x42
Name
info.txt
The final part of the istat output merely lists all the attributes present in the MFT record and
provides the attribute type, size and resident/non‐resident status of each. This is achieved by
processing the individual attribute headers.
7.2.3.5 Recover File Content
The final step in the manual analysis of an NTFS file system is to recover the file's content. The
content is located through the $DATA attribute which can be resident or non‐resident. In the case
of resident data the actual file content is stored in the MFT record itself. This is the preferred
method of storage for very small files. However, larger files will obviously not fit into a 
byte structure and as such these need to be stored in another location. To achieve this a non‐
resident $DATA attribute can be used.
Listing 7.23 shows the $DATA attribute for the file info.txt in NTFS_V1.E01. From this listing
it is obvious that the content is stored in a resident fashion. The ASCII values are displaying the
actual file content. The question is, how are these values recovered by forensic tools?

Processing the common attribute header shows that this is a $DATA attribute (type 0x80). It also
shows that the data is resident. As this is a resident attribute, the common header is immediately
followed by the resident attribute header. This informs the analyst that there are 0xA6 (
)
bytes of data commencing at 0x18 (
) relative to the start of the attribute. This data in Listing
7.23 is the actual file content itself.
This should provide sufficient information to recover the file's content. The actual data exists at
offset 0x170 in the MFT record itself. The command dd if=mft.dd.raw skip=$((64*1024 +
0x170)) bs=1 count=$((0xA6)) of=info.manual.txt can be used to extract this directly from the
recovered MFT file. Listing 7.24 shows the MD5 sums for this file and the same file recovered
using the sleuthkit. Why do these MD5 values differ?
The reason for this discrepancy becomes clear when the entire MFT record is analysed. The data
for this resident attribute crosses the sector boundary inside the MFT record. Hence the fixup
array needs to be consulted. Listing 7.22 showed the entire MFT record for this file. Notice the
fixup array contains the content shown in Listing 7.25. The value 0x0500 has replaced the two
bytes at offset 0x1FE in the MFT record. The original value of these bytes was 0x6C61.
Replacing the 0x0500 value with 0x6C61 will result in the same MD5 sum being obtained.
Listing 7.26 shows the MD5 sums of the three files. The newly modified file is underlined.

But what of the case where the $DATA attribute is non‐resident? Listing 7.27 shows a non‐
resident $DATA attribute for the file called hills.jpg (MFT Record #: 
) in NTFS_V1.E01.
Processing the common attribute header shows this to be a $DATA attribute (type 0x80) of size
0x48 bytes, but in this case the attribute is non‐resident. The common header is therefore
immediately followed by the non‐resident header. This is processed in Table 7.40.
Table 7.40 Non‐resident attribute header structure.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x08 Starting VCN
0x00 (
)
0x08
0x08 Ending VCN
0x43 (
)
0x10
0x02 Runlist Offset
0x40 (
)
0x12
0x02 Compression Unit 0x00 (
)
0x14
0x04 Unused
0x00 (
)
0x18
0x08 Allocated Size
0x44000 (
)
0x20
0x08 Actual Size
0x4313D (
)
0x28
0x08 Initialised Size
0x4313D (
)
The runlist in this $DATA attribute represents clusters 
 to 
 (a total of 
 clusters).
From $Boot it is known that the cluster size is 0x1000 bytes, and this structure shows that
0x44000 bytes have been allocated for this file (in other words 
 clusters). The actual size is
slightly less than this, 0x4313D (
 bytes), meaning that there will be some slack space
present.
The key information in a non‐resident attribute header is the location of the run list. In this case
the offset to the run list is 0x40. Examining this provides the information: 0x21 44 0042.
Interpreting this shows that 0x2 bytes are used for the starting cluster and a single byte is used
for the number of contiguous clusters. The number of contiguous clusters is 0x44 and the starting
cluster is 0x4200. Listing 7.28 shows the recovery of 
 bytes from the start of cluster

0x4200 using dd and the recovery of the same file using icat. Comparing their MD5 values
shows the content to be equivalent.
This section has shown the method for the recovery of both resident and non‐fragmented non‐
resident files in the NTFS file system. Section 7.3.3 will examine the effect of file fragmentation
on the recovery process.
7.3 NTFS Advanced Analysis
The previous section demonstrated the basic techniques used in file system forensic analysis of
an NTFS system. In this section some of the more advanced analysis techniques are examined.
These include how tools such as fsstat gather all of the file system information by processing
more than just the $Boot file, how fragmented files are recovered, how deleted files are
recovered and how alternate data streams affect the digital forensic process.
7.3.1 Further File System Information
Listing 7.11 provided the information that was available about an NTFS file system from the
fsstat command. Most of this information was manually recovered from the $Boot file; however,
not all information was found there. In particular the volume name, NTFS version and the
attribute definition information were not found in $Boot.
The fsstat command actually looks beyond the $Boot structure. It also processes the
$VOLUME_NAME and $VOLUME_INFORMATION attributes to get the volume name and
NTFS version information. Listing 7.29 shows these two attributes found in MFT Record 3 in
NTFS_V1.E01.

Referring to Section 7.1.6 shows how these structures can be processed. The
$VOLUME_NAME attribute contains the volume name as resident data encoded in UTF‐16.
From Listing 7.29 this value is NTFS‐FS.
The $VOLUME_INFORMATION resident data can be processed using Table 7.19. This shows
major and minor version information of 0x03 and 0x01, respectively. This equates to version 3.1
which is the version of NTFS associated with any file system created since Windows NT.
The final piece of information in Listing 7.11 that has not yet been found is the attribute
definition information. While there is a standard association between attribute‐type identifiers
and names (e.g. $DATA is 0x80) it can be changed, or new attributes can be defined. NTFS
maintains a file called $AttrDef (MFT record 4) which contains a 
 byte entry for each
attribute. Listing 7.30 shows the $AttrDef entry for the $FILENAME attribute in
NTFS_V1.E01. Table 7.41 shows the structure of this and also the values from Listing 7.30.
Table 7.41 Partially processed $AttrDef entry structure with values from Listing 7.30.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x80 Name
The attribute's name (UTF‐16 encoding).
$FILENAME
0x80
0x04 Type ID
The type ID used in the attribute header.
0x30
0x8C 0x04 Flags
Flag values. 0x02 attribute can be used in index; 0x40
attribute is always resident; 0x08 attribute can be
resident.
0x42
0x90
0x08 Minimum
Size
The minimum size of the attribute in bytes.
0x44 (
)
0x98
0x08 Maximum
Size
The maximum size of the attribute in bytes.
0x242 (
)
Examining this data shows some expected results, for instance the type ID is 0x30 (
) – 
which is the default for the $FILENAME attribute. The attribute can be used in an index and is
resident (the flags are 0x42). This means, as seen previously, that filenames can be used in index
structures (as they are in directories) and also that the attribute is always resident. It is never
necessary to interpret a data run to locate a $FILENAME's data, it will always be present in the
MFT record itself. Listing 7.31 shows the fsstat output for this attribute showing the information
discovered in $AttrDef.

The attribute's minimum and maximum size are also specified in the $AttrDef entry. In the case
of $FILENAME in this example these are 0x44 (
) bytes and 0x242 (
) bytes,
respectively. In the case of attributes such as $DATA which have an unlimited size, these values
will be 0x00 and 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF, respectively.
7.3.2 Deleted Files
The Files directory in NTFS_V1.E01 contains two files. In NTFS_V2.E01 these two files,
hills.jpg and delete.txt (MFT record numbers 
 and 
 respectively), have been deleted.
The delete.txt file consisted solely of resident data, while the hills.jpg file contains non‐resident
data. Listing 7.32 shows an excerpt from istat on both of these files before they were deleted (i.e.
in NTFS_V1.E01).

Examining the resident file delete.txt (MFT Record Number 
) after deletion
(NTFS_V2.E01) initially shows the following MFT Record. This is shown in Listing 7.33. It is
obvious from this that the data is still present – the resident data attribute is still present and can
be interpreted. Indeed almost all of the same information is present as was present before
deletion. The MFT Record is marked as being unallocated in the $BITMAP attribute associated
with the $MFT file (MFT Record 0).
But what about non‐resident $DATA attributes? MFT record 
, hills.jpg, was a large file that
used a non‐resident data attribute. Originally this file occupied 
 clusters beginning at
. Listing 7.34 shows an excerpt from cluster 
 after the file has been deleted.
This shows that the file content is still present in the file system.

Examining the MFT record for this file shows only one single change, the link count is reset to
zero. As with the resident file the $BITMAP attribute in MFT record 
 is also unset so as to
indicate that this MFT record number can now be reused. Additionally in the case of a non‐
resident data attribute, the contents of the bitmap file are updated to show that the clusters are no
longer in use. The entry for cluster 
 is located in byte 
 in the bitmap file (least
significant bit). The contents of the file are found in the 
 clusters beginning at cluster
. Hence 
 bytes from this point will provide the bitmap information. Listing 7.35
shows these bytes both before and after deletion.
Examining the data from $Bitmap shows the 
 clusters before their deallocation. An extract
from this bitmap structure (the final two bytes – 0xFF0F) is shown in Figure 7.7. Examining
Listing 7.35 shows that all of these are deallocated after deletion (all zero values).
Figure 7.7 The relevant bitmap values for hills.jpg before file deletion.
7.3.3 Fragmented Files
Fragmented files are files for which the content is stored in a number of fragments rather than in
a single block of data. On busy file systems this is a common means of storing a large file. It
occurs when there is insufficient space in one single area of the disk for the file's contents.
Instead, parts of the file are stored in different locations.

In NTFS these locations are referenced through data runs in the run list. To this point the
encountered runlists have contained a single data run, in other words the files have been
contiguous. More complex runlists contain multiple runs, as shown in Listing 7.36.
Knowing that the runlist is composed of a number of data runs means that processing begins
from the left most byte. This byte is 0x31. As with all runs the first nibble represents the number
of bytes in the starting cluster, and the second nibble represents the number of bytes in the size of
the data run. The total of these nibbles (
) is the number of bytes in total for the data
run (excluding the first byte). This means that the first data run is 0x310B002A01. The next byte
commences the second data run and is 0x21 meaning that the data run consists of a total of three
bytes (after the first) giving 0x2102C7FF. This is followed by 0x21 giving a data run of
0x21060010. Finally the byte value 0x00 is encountered marking the end of the run list. Hence
the runlist in Listing 7.36 is composed of three individual data runs.
The data runs can be processed as we saw in Section 7.1.6. For instance the first data run
(0x310B002A01) consists of 0x0B clusters starting at cluster 0x12A00. Converting these values
to decimal gives: 
 clusters beginning at cluster 
. This means that the clusters:
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
,
, 
 and 
 contain file content.
The second data run is: 0x2102C7FF. Processing this gives 0x02 clusters starting at 0xFFC7;
however, the starting cluster is a signed number that is relative to the start of the previous data
run. OxFFC7 is 
, meaning that the second data run commences at
. Hence the clusters: 
 and 
 are the next two
clusters encountered in the file.
The third data run is 0x21060010 meaning that it consists of 0x06 clusters beginning at cluster
number 0x1000 (
), which is relative to the start of the last run. The last run commenced
at 
 meaning that this third run commences at 
. This
means that 
, 
, 
, 
, 
 and 
 are also part
of the file's contents. The next byte is 0x00 signalling the end of the run list!
Hence the run list shown in Listing 7.36 represents the following clusters: 
, 
,
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
,
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
 and
. The key point to remember when processing subsequent data runs in NTFS is that the
starting cluster of subsequent runs is relative to the start of the previous run.
7.3.4 Alternate Data Streams
Alternate data streams (ADS) are named secondary $DATA attributes which often provide
information about a file. One of the most common uses is to identify the source on the Internet
from which a file was downloaded. This ADS, called Zone.Identifier, shows applications that the
file might not be fully trusted! ADS can also be used as an anti‐forensic technique allowing data
to be hidden in a named secondary $DATA stream. Listing 7.37 shows the MFT record for

islands.jpg in NTFS_V1.E01. Processing the alternate data stream in Listing 7.37 is shown in
Table 7.42.
Table 7.42 Processing the alternate data stream in Listing 7.37. The offsets for the name/data are
found in the common attribute header.
Attribute Header
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x04 Attribute Type 0x80 ($DATA)
0x04
0x04 Attribute Size 0x48 (
)
0x08
0x01 Non‐resident
0x00 (Resident)
0x09
0x01 Name Length 0x09 (
)
0x0A 0x02 Name Offset
0x18 (
)
0x0C 0x02 Flags
0x00 (
)
0x0E
0x02 Attribute ID
0x04 (
)
Resident Header
0x10
0x04 Content Size
0x12 (
)
0x14
0x02 Content Offset 0x30 (
)
Data
0x18
0x09 Name
HiddenADS
0x30
0x12 Data
Hidden Information

The Sleuthkit can also process ADS. Listing 7.38 shows an excerpt from the fls command when
run on NTFS_V1.E01. This shows that there are two instances for islands.jpg with ID values
67‐128‐2 and 67‐128‐4. Previously with FAT and ExFAT, fls returned a single number to
uniquely identify each file. In NTFS, due to alternate data streams this is not possible. Hence
every ID number used by Sleuthkit for NTFS is a complex number in the form:
mftRecordNum‐attributeType‐attributeId
Consider the alternate data stream islands.jpg:HiddenADS in Listing 7.38. Sleuthkit's ID
number for this is 67‐128‐4. This is the MFT record number (
), the attribute type ($DATA is
0x80 which is 
) and the attribute ID (which is 
 – see Table 7.42). With the icat
command the MFT record number can be used by itself (i.e. 
), in which case the primary
$DATA attribute is recovered, or an alternate data stream can be recovered by giving the
complete ID number. The recovery of the primary and alternate data streams is shown in Listing
7.39.
This generic structure of mftRecordNumber‐attributeType‐attributeID can be used to recover any
attribute from an NTFS file system. Consider Listing 7.37. The second attribute in this is a
filename attribute (type 0x30) with an attribute ID of 0x03. Listing 7.40 shows the recovery of
this attribute's data using icat.
7.3.5 Large MFT Records
In the case in which the attributes for the MFT record will not fit into a single MFT record, there
exists the $ATTRIBUTE_LIST attribute which will provide the locations to the other attributes.
Listing 7.41 shows a MFT record in which many hard links were created to the file (MFT record
 in NTFS_V2.E01), thereby creating a $FILE_NAME attribute for each link. Once the

storage space required for these exceeded the MFT Record Size (
 bytes) the
$ATTRIBUTE_LIST attribute was created. This file is islands.jpg (MFT Record: 
) in
NTFS_V2.E01.
Processing the highlighted $ATTRIBUTE_LIST attribute shows the data to be non‐resident with
a data run composed of 0x21014152, meaning that the run consists of a single cluster beginning
at cluster 0x5241 (
). Listing 7.42 shows an excerpt from this cluster.
Each 
 byte entry in this cluster contains information about a single attribute and where those
attributes can be found. Listing 7.42 shows three attribute entries. These are processed in Table
7.43.

Table 7.43 Processed attribute entries from Listing 7.42.
Offset Size Name
Entry 1
Entry 2
Entry 3
0x00
0x04 Attribute Type 0x30
0x30
0x30
0x04
0x02 Entry Length
0x20 (
) 0x20 (
) 0x20 (
)
0x06
0x01 Name Length 0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x07
0x01 Name Offset
0x1A (
) 0x1A (
) 0x1A (
)
0x08
0x08 Starting VCN 0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x10
0x08 File Reference Seq: 0x01
Seq: 0x01
Seq: 0x01
(
)
(
)
(
)
MFT: 0x43
MFT: 0x43
MFT: 0x46
(
)
(
)
(
)
0x18
0x01 Attribute ID
0x06 (
)
0x08 (
)
0x00 (
)
The results from processing this data show that the three attributes reside in two different MFT
records, the original record, 0x43 (
) and a secondary record 0x46 (
). During full
analysis the remainder of the attribute entries would be processed and any other MFT records
identified. In doing so the reader will discover two $FILENAME attributes in MFT Record 
,
with the remaining attributes (including the $ATRRIBUTE_LIST attribute located in the original
MFT Record (
)).
What happens when a forensic tool is run on these two MFT records? Running istat on Record
 will show the attribute header information and information on all of the attributes present in
the MFT record. This includes $STANDARD_INFORMATION, eight $FILE_NAME attributes
(two of which are actually in MFT Record 
) and the $ATTRIBUTE_LIST attribute. The
istat output for the $ATTRIBUTE_LIST attribute is shown in Listing 7.43.

7.4 Summary
Knowledge of NTFS is of vital importance in traditional digital forensics. The NTFS file system
is the standard file system for Windows machines and as such is very commonly encountered in
file system forensic analysis.
For its day, NTFS is a modern file system. It was one of the first file systems that was based on
B‐Trees, a structure that has become standard in most modern file systems. It was also one of the
first to use data runs to locate information. These structures are again commonly encountered in
modern‐day file systems (although generally by a different name!). Hence, while the popularity
of NTFS may be waning, indeed the popularity of traditional computers/laptops is waning,
knowledge of the NTFS file system is still of vital importance for any digital forensic analyst.
Exercises
1. In Section 7.2.3 the NTFS_V1.E01 file system was partially analysed. As exercises please
try the following:
a. During the listing of files the contents of the Root Directory were partially listed
(Listing 7.18 and Table 7.36). Complete this process and compare the results to that of
fls.
b. When listing files in the root directory another directory (Files) was discovered. Locate
the MFT record for this directory and list the contents of this directory.
2. In relation to the $DATA attribute shown in Listing 7.44 answer the following questions.
a. What is the attribute size?
b. List the clusters in which the file content can be found.
3. In relation to the image provided in NTFS_V3.E01 please answer the following questions.
a. What is the volume label?
b. How many clusters are in the file system?
c. What is the MD5 sum for the $MFT file?
4. There is a file in NTFS_V3.E01 called hills.jpg (MFT Record #: 
). In relation to
this file answer the following:
a. Extract the MFT record for this file from the file and calculate its MD5 sum.
b. When was this file created?
c. What is the file size in bytes?

d. This file is fragmented. How many data runs are present?
e. Recover the file content.
Bibliography
Alazab, M., Venkatraman, S., and Watters, P. (2009). Effective digital forensic analysis of the
NTFS disk image. Ubiquitous Computing and Communication Journal 4 (1): 551–558.
Alazab, M., Venkatraman, S., and Watters, P. (2009). Digital forensic techniques for static
analysis of NTFS images. In: Proceedings of ICIT2009, 4th International Conference on
Information Technology. IEEE Xplore 551–558.
Carrier, B. (2005). File System Forensic Analysis. Boston, MA; London:Addison‐Wesley.
Cho, G.S. (2015). A new NTFS anti‐forensic technique for NTFS index entry. The Journal of
Korea Institute of Information, Electronics, and Communication Technology 8 (4): 327–337.
Chow, K.P., Law, F.Y., Kwan, M.Y., and Lai, P.K. (2007). The rules of time on NTFS file system.
In: 2nd International Workshop on Systematic Approaches to Digital Forensic Engineering
(SADFE'07), 71–85. IEEE.
Galhuber, M. and Luh, R. (2021). Time for truth: Forensic analysis of NTFS timestamps. In:
Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, 1–
10. ACM.
Huebner, E., Bem, D., and Wee, C.K. (2006). Data hiding in the NTFS file system. Digital
Investigation 3 (4): 211–226.
Kai, Z., En, C., and Qinquan, G. (2010). Analysis and implementation of NTFS file system based
on computer forensics. In: 2010 2nd International Workshop on Education Technology and
Computer Science, vol. 1, 325–328. IEEE. 
Karresand, M., Axelsson, S., and Dyrkolbotn, G.O. (2019). Using NTFS cluster allocation
behavior to find the location of user data. Digital Investigation 29: S51–S60.
Karresand, M., Dyrkolbotn, G.O., and Axelsson, S. (2020). An empirical study of the NTFS
cluster allocation behavior over time. Forensic Science International: Digital Investigation
33: 301008.
Knutson, T. (2024). Filesystem Timestamps: What Makes Them Tick? –SANS Institute
[Internet]. www.sans.org. [cited 2024 April 3]. https://www.sans.org/white-papers/36842/
(accessed 13 August 2024).
van der Meer, V., Jonker, H., and van den Bos, J. (2021). A contemporary investigation of NTFS
file fragmentation. Forensic Science International: Digital Investigation 38: 301125.
Microsoft (2019). NTFS Overview [Internet]. Microsoft.com. [cited 2024 April 3].
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/storage/file-server/ntfs-overview (accessed
13 August 2024).

Microsoft (2021). Distributed Link Tracking and Object Identifiers ‐ Win32 apps [Internet].
learn.microsoft.com. [cited 2024 April 3]. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-
us/windows/win32/fileio/distributed-link-tracking-and-object-identifiers (accessed 13 August
2024).
Microsoft (2024). Security identifiers (Windows 10) ‐ Windows security [Internet].
docs.microsoft.com. [cited 2024 April 3]. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-
us/windows/security/identity-protection/access-control/security-identifiers (accessed 13
August 2024).
Mohamed, A. and Khalid, C. (2021). Detection of suspicious timestamps in NTFS using volume
shadow copies. International Journal of Computer Network and Information Security 13 (4):
62–69.
Nordvik, R., Toolan, F., and Axelsson, S. (2019). Using the object ID index as an investigative
approach for NTFS file systems. Digital Investigation 28: S30–S39.
Oh, J., Lee, S., and Hwang, H. (2021). NTFS Data Tracker: tracking file data history based on
$LogFile. Forensic Science International: Digital Investigation 39: 301309.
Palmbach, D. and Breitinger, F. (2020). Artifacts for detecting timestamp manipulation in NTFS
on windows and their reliability. Forensic Science International: Digital Investigation 32:
300920.
Parsonage, H. (2008). The Meaning of Linkfiles In Forensic Examinations A look at the practical
value to forensic examinations of dates and times, and object identifiers in Windows shortcut
files [Internet] [cited 2024 April 3].
http://computerforensics.parsonage.co.uk/downloads/TheMeaningofLIFE.pdf (accessed 13
August 2024).
Updyke, D. and Jaconski, M. (2024). Using Alternate Data Streams in the Collection and
Exfiltration of Data s]. SEI Blog [cited 2024 April 3]. https://insights.sei.cmu.edu/blog/using-
alternate-data-streams-in-the-collection-and-exfiltration-of-data/ (accessed 13 August 2024).
Notes
1 Now also shared with ExFAT.
2 A B‐Tree with two children for each node is called a binary tree.
3 This is a binary tree as each node has two children.
4 OS/2 was an operating system created jointly by Microsoft and IBM until 1992 and solely by
IBM until 2001.
5 This is the SID of the Windows local administrators group.
6 Some common keys and authority meanings can be found at https://docs.microsoft.com/en-
us/windows/win32/secauthz/well-known-sids.

7 Note that there is also a $Bitmap file, which contains the allocation status of clusters in the file
system (MFT Record 6). It is important not to confuse the two.
8 In all NTFS file systems the first MFT record (
) is the record for $MFT itself!
9 The second record is that of $MFTMirr in case of error with the $MFT file.
OceanofPDF.com

Part III
Linux File Systems
OceanofPDF.com

8
The EXT2 File System
The most commonly encountered file systems in Linux systems are the ext
family of file systems. Most modern distributions use ext4 as their default
file system. Ext2 and ext3 are less frequently encountered, but are still used
for removable media. Additionally some older installations still use ext3 as
their main file system. The ext file system is also found on many Android
phones, meaning that even if a true Linux system is never encountered,
knowledge of ext is required in order to perform small‐scale device
forensics effectively.
This chapter initially provides some background on the ext family of file
systems and then proceeds to describe the structures of the ext2 file system
in detail. This allows an understanding of how the file system stores
information and how digital forensic tools process the file system. The next
chapter examines the advanced features introduced in ext3 and ext4.
The Extended File System (ext) family of file systems has long been the
standard on the Linux OS. In 1992 the ext file system was released with the
aim of developing it as the standard for Linux. Little under a year later
version 2 (ext2) was released. This file system proved to be very successful
and is still in use today. Usually ext2 is encountered on USB/Flash drives as
it is not a journaled file system, and hence effective for removable media
where the journaling overhead may cause performance issues.
Ext3 was released in 2001 and was the first Linux file system to provide
support for journaling. Journaling allows for more robust and resilient file
systems in which a catastrophic failure is less likely to corrupt and/or lose
data. The journal is a temporary storage area to which changes to the file
system are written prior to writing them to the actual file system. This
means that if power is lost during the file system write operation the file
system can be repaired by accessing the journal.
Ext4 began as additional functionality for ext3 but was forked early in its
development. For this reason many people view ext4 as being an extension
of ext3 rather than a new file system. The changes between ext3 and ext2

were sufficiently large to call it a new file system but this is not the case
from ext3 to ext4. Ext4 improves the recovery abilities of the journal by
adding checksums, ensuring that journal entries themselves are not corrupt
prior to recovery and also provides for delayed file allocation. This means
that space on disk is not allocated until the write is about to take place. In
ext3 the space was allocated when the information was written to the
journal.
One of the major benefits of the ext family (at least from 2 onwards) is the
backwards compatibility. An ext2 file system can be upgraded to ext4 with
no need to reformat! This is unlike the Microsoft family (although families
might be better) of file systems: FAT, NTFS and ReFS which have no
backwards compatibility.
Table 8.1 shows some information about the ext family of file systems in
comparison to FAT32 and NTFS file systems.
Table 8.1 Comparison of ext file systems with traditional Windows file
systems.
File
System
Max. Filename
Lengtha)
Max. File
Size
Max. Volume
Size
Timestampsb)
FAT32
255
 GiB
 TiB
MAB
NTFS
255
 PiB
 PiB
MACB
Ext2
255
 TiB
 TiB
MAC
Ext3
255
 TiB
 TiB
MAC
Ext4
255
 TiB
 EiB
MACB
a) This length is given in bytes. If unicode characters are used the number of characters will be less.
b) Timestamps are an important piece of information in forensics. The four traditional times are
MACB: M – Content modification; A – File access; C – Metadata modification; B – Birth time (i.e.
Creation).
8.1 On‐Disk Structures
The ext file systems are divided into a number of mini file systems known
as block groups. Each block group is capable of managing its own storage

space and file metadata. Each block group also contains information about
all other block groups in the file system. Figure 8.1 shows the general
structure of the file system.
Figure 8.1 General layout of an ext volume.
From Figure 8.1 the block group structure is clear. With the exception of the
beginning of the volume the entire volume is composed of equal‐sized
block groups.1 All ext volumes begin with 
 bytes of unallocated
space. Block Group 0 begins immediately after this area.
Block groups, as mini file systems, have their own internal structure. Figure
8.2 shows the structure of block group 0 (BG0). Not all block groups will
contain the superblock structure (although the structure is duplicated in a
number of locations on the file system). However, BG0 will always contain
a superblock structure.
The superblock itself is one of the most important structures in ext and the
beginning of any analysis of the file system. The superblock is similar to the
volume boot record of FAT and $Boot of NTFS. It contains information
about the file system layout and describes the block group structure.

Figure 8.2 Internal block group structure.
Each block group contains a block group descriptor table which provides a
description of all block groups in the file system. This structure is identical
in every block group. The block group descriptor allows every structure
inside the block groups to be mapped.
The block group descriptor is followed by a reserved area to allow for the
file system size to increase. Ext is one of the few file systems that allows

for the file system's size to be increased during its life time. This reserved
area provides space for growth of the block group descriptor table.
The bitmap structures are also found in the block group. These structures
show the allocation status of the block group's data blocks and inodes. The
inodes are the structures that contain the metadata information. The bitmaps
are followed by the inode table, the area of the block group that contains all
the inode information. Inodes in ext contain all the metadata about the file,
except for the file name itself. The file name is instead stored in a directory
entry. The inode also provides the location of the file's data blocks. The
actual file contents are stored in these data blocks.
In ext metadata storage can be viewed as a combination of FAT and NTFS.
In FAT all the metadata is stored in the directory entry, which provides the
name and metadata for every file in a particular directory. In ext, directory
entries are used to store the filename. In NTFS all metadata information
(including the filename) is stored in the MFT, a structure similar to the
inode table found in ext.
The remainder of this section examines these individual structures in more
detail.
8.1.1 The Superblock
The superblock is one of the most important structures in the ext file
system. It contains information about the file system itself. The information
in the superblock provides the number and size of block groups in the file
system. The number of blocks and inodes available in the file system are
discovered in the superblock. In later versions of the superblock (all modern
ones) the UUID and volume name (if present) are also found. Even the time
at which the file system was last mounted and last written can be found
here. Occasionally even the directory upon which the file system was last
mounted can be found in the superblock.2
The structure of block group 0, in which a superblock is always found, was
shown previously (Figure 8.2). Based on the fact that file systems have
 bytes of unallocated space before the superblock and that the
superblock is 
 bytes in size the dd command shown in Listing 8.1
can be used to extract the superblock.3

The superblock is regarded as one of the most important structures in the
ext family of file systems. Therefore in early versions of the file system a
copy of the superblock was found in every single block group. In later
versions the default was to use the sparse_superblock feature when creating
the file system in which a copy of the superblock was located only in
certain block groups. These block groups were 0 and 1 and then all powers
of 3, 5 and 7. Table 8.2 summarises the locations in which they can be
found.
Table 8.2 Block groups in ext that contain superblock structures.
0 1 3
5
7
9
25
49
27 125 343
81 625 2401
… …
…
The superblock, like most ext structures, defaults to storing information in a
little‐endian format. The superblock is 
 bytes in size but much of
this space is unused. Table 8.3 shows the structure of the superblock. Some
values in this structure have been omitted.

Table 8.3 Superblock structure. Note that some values have been omitted.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Total # Inodes
The total number of inodes in the file
system.
0x04
0x04 Total # Blocks
The total number of blocks in the file
system.
0x08
0x04 # Reserved
Blocks
Ext can reserve a portion of blocks that only
root can write to. This allows for rescue if
the non‐reserved space is fully occupied.
0x0C 0x04 Free Block
Count
The number of blocks that are unused.
0x10
0x04 Free Inode
Count
The number of unused inodes in the file
system.
0x18
0x04 Log Block Size
The block size (in bytes) is given by the
formula 
.
0x20
0x04 Blocks/Group
The number of blocks in each block group.
Using this and the total number of blocks
the number of block groups can be
calculated.
0x28
0x04 Inodes/Group
The number of inodes in each block group.
0x2C 0x04 Mount Time
The unix time at which the file system was
last mounted.
0x30
0x04 Write Time
The unix time at which the file system was
last written.
0x34
0x02 # mounts
The number of mounts since the last file
system check (fsck).
0x36
0x02 max. # mounts
The maximum number of mounts before the
file system's consistency is checked.
0x38
0x02 Magic
A magic number (0xEF53).
0x3A 0x02 File System
State
The current state of the file system. Values:
0x01 – Clean; and 0x02 – Errors.

Offset Size Name
Description
0x3C 0x02 File System
Errors
What to do if errors are detected. Values:
1 – Continue; 2 – Remount read‐only; and
3 – Panic.
0x3E
0x02 Minor Revision
Version
Minor revision level of the file system.
0x40
0x04 Time Last
Check
Unix time representing the last file system
check.
0x48
0x04 Creator OS
Identifier of the OS that created the file
system. Values: 0 – Linux; 1 – GNU Hurd;
2 – Masix; 3 – FreeBSD; and 4 – Lites.
0x50
0x02 UID Reserved
Blocks
The UID that can use reserved blocks
(default is 0, i.e. root).
0x52 0x02 GID Reserved
Blocks
The GID that can use reserved blocks
(default is 0).
0x54 0x04 First Inode
The first inode that is available for standard
files. In older versions of ext this was 11. In
more recent versions it may be different.
0x58 0x02 Inode Size
The inode size in bytes. In revision 0 this
was always 128 bytes.
0x5A 0x02 Block Group
Number
This is the block group number in which this
superblock resides.
0x5C 0x04 Compatible
Features
If the file system driver does not support
these features the file system can still be
mounted.
0x60 0x04 Incompatible
Features
If the file system driver does not support
these features then the file system should not
be mounted.
0x64 0x04 RO‐Compatible
Features
If the file system driver does not support
these features then the file system should be
mounted as read‐only.

0x68 0x10 UUID
A universally unique identifier for the file
system.
0x78 0x10 Volume Name
The volume name.
0x88 0x40 Last Mounted
Directory
The directory on which the file system was
last mounted. Not normally used in most file
system drivers.
0xD0 0x10 Journal UUID
The UUID for the journal file.
0xE0 0x04 Journal Inode
The inode for the journal file.
0xE4 0x04 Journal Device
Number
A device identifier in the case where the
journal is stored on a separate file system.
The Sleuth Kit supports the ext family of file systems. The fsstat command
generally reads the superblock structure and provides the information
shown in Listing 8.2.

The superblock contains three features fields, for compatible, incompatible
and read‐only compatible features. In the case of compatible features these
features are optional and generally provide performance improvements;
however, if a file system driver does not support any of these features the
file system can still be mounted. The incompatible features require that the
file system driver must support that feature. If the driver does not support
the features then the file system will not be mounted. Finally the read‐only
compatible features allow the file system to be mounted as a read‐only file

system in the case that the driver does not support one or more of these
features. Table 8.4 shows the flag values for all of the features.
Table 8.4 Compatible, incompatible and read‐only compatible features.
Flag
Compatible
Incompatible
Read‐Only
0x0001 Pre‐allocate
directories.
Compression.
Sparse
superblocks/descriptor
tables.
0x0002 AFS Server inodes
exist.
Directory entries
contain a type field.
File system uses a 64‐bit
file size.
0x0004 File system has a
journal (ext3/4
only).
File system needs
to replay the
journal.
Directory contents stored
as a tree.
0x0008 Inodes have
extended
attributes.
File system uses a
journal device.
0x0010 Inode resized.
0x0020 Directories use
hash index.
8.1.2 The Block Group Descriptor Table
A copy of the block group descriptor table is found in every block group in
the ext file system that also contains a superblock.4 The table is composed
of a number of block group descriptors, which describe a block group.
Information contained in the block group descriptor includes the location of
the inode bitmap, the inode table and the block bitmap. It also contains the
number of free blocks and inodes in the particular block group. The location
information in each block group descriptor is identical in all copies of the
block group descriptor table found throughout the file system. This
information is created at file system creation and rarely changes. The
statistical information in the block group descriptor (free nodes, free inodes,
etc.) is not guaranteed to be identical. Generally this information is only
updated in block group 0.

Each block group descriptor is 
 bytes in size. The block group
descriptor table contains one descriptor for each of the block groups in the
file system. The size of the block group descriptor table can be calculated
from the superblock. In order to do this it is necessary to discover the block
size, the number of blocks per group and the total number of blocks. From
this the number of block groups that are present can be calculated. Each
block group will comprise a single 
 byte block group descriptor entry
in the table. Using this information it is possible to determine how many
blocks are needed for the block group descriptor table. Consider a file
system in which the block size is 
 bytes, consisting of
 blocks, 
 blocks in each block group. The total
number of block groups5 is given by:
Hence the number of block groups is 
. The block group descriptor
table must therefore contain 
 32‐byte entries. The bytes required to
store the entire block group are given by:
This result means that 
 bytes are required to store the entire
block group structure which is:
blocks. Hence 
 blocks are required to store the block group descriptor
table.

Table 8.5 Block group descriptor structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Data Bitmap
Starting block of the data bitmap.
0x04
0x04 Inode Bitmap
Starting block of the inode bitmap.
0x08
0x04 Inode Table
Starting block of the inode table.
0x0C 0x02 Free Block Count The number of free blocks.
0x0E
0x02 Free Inode Count
The number of free inodes.
0x10
0x02 Used Directory
Count
The number of inodes that are allocated to
directories.
0x12
0x02 Padding
2 bytes of padding.
0x14
0xC Reserved
Reserved for future use.
The structure of a block group descriptor entry is given in Table 8.5. The
block group descriptor table will allow the mapping of all block groups in
the file system.
8.1.3 The Inode Table
Inodes are the key metadata structure in the ext family of file systems.
Traditionally in ext2, inodes are 
 bytes in size. The inode table is the
area in which inodes are located. The inodes in the inode table refer to files
that are present in that block group. Hence each inode table (unlike
superblocks and block group descriptor tables) is different.
Inodes record metadata such as MAC time, file permissions, file owner, file
size and file location. However, unlike many other file systems the inode
does not record the file name. This is to be found in the contents of a
directory. The structure of an inode is given in Table 8.6.

Table 8.6 Ext2 inode structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Mode
File type and file permissions (see Mode and
Permissions).
0x02
0x02 UID
User ID of the file owner.
0x04
0x04 Size
File size in bytes.
0x08
0x04 Access Time Unix time value representing the time the file
was last accessed.
0x0C 0x04 Change Time Unix time value representing the time the file's
metadata was last modified.
0x10
0x04 Modified
Time
Unix time value representing the time the file's
content was last modified.
0x14
0x04 Deletion
Time
Unix time value representing the time the file
was deleted. If the file has not been deleted
this value will be 0x00.
0x18
0x02 GID
The group ID of the owning group.
0x1A 0x02 Link Count
The number of references to this file.
0x1C 0x04 Blocks
Number of 512 byte blocks used for this
inode's content.
0x20
0x04 Flags
Inode Flags (see Inode Flags).
0x24
0x04 OS
Dependent 1
OS‐dependent information.
0x28
0x3C Content
Location
15 
 0x04 byte block pointers. (see Block
Pointers).
0x64
0x04 Generation
File version (used by NFS).
0x68
0x04 File XAttr
Block number containing the file's extended
attributes (if present).
0x6C 0x04 Dir XAttr
Block number containing the directory's
extended attributes (if present).
0x70
0x04 Fragment
Address
Never used (marked obsolete in Ext 4).

Offset Size Name
Description
0x74
0x0C OS
Dependent 2
Further bytes for OS‐dependent information.
8.1.3.1 Mode/Permissions
In Linux file systems the file permissions are stored inside the file system
itself. In ext the inode's mode value stores this information in addition to the
file type. The mode is a two‐byte value at the very start of the inode entry.
Consider the value 0x41C0. The most significant nibble, 0x4, represents the
file type. In this case this value represents a directory. The possible values
for this nibble are shown in Table 8.7.
Table 8.7 Interpretation of the most significant nibble in the ext mode
structure.
Value Meaning
0x1
FIFO
0x2
Character device
0x4
Directory
0x6
Block device
0x8
Regular file
0xA
Symbolic link
0xC
Socket
The remaining three nibbles provide the permissions for the file in question.
These nibbles are converted to binary and the nine least significant bits
represent the rwxrwxrwx permissions. A permission is set if the
corresponding bit is 1. In the sample value, 0x41C0, the three least
significant nibbles are 0x1C0. Converting this to binary gives
0b000111000000. Of the nine least significant bits the first three represent
the owner permissions, the next three represent the group permissions and
the final three bits represent the permissions for all other users on the
system. The corresponding Linux permission string would be rwx‐‐‐‐‐‐.
The second most significant nibble (0x1 in this case) can also have special
meanings. In addition to the least significant bit of this nibble representing

the file owner's read permission, the other three bits can also have special
meanings. The most significant bit represents a set UID file, the next most
significant represents a set GID file and the second least significant bit
represents the sticky bit. The set UID permission is found on executable
files in Linux. If this bit is set then the executable will run with the
permission of the owning user, not the user who executes the file. The set
GID performs a similar task for the executable file's group. Listing 8.3
shows a common example of the setuid bit. The /bin/passwd command can
be run by any user in order to change their Linux password; however, in
order to change the password one must be root. Hence this command is a
setuid command denoted by the s in the permission string.
The purpose of the sticky bit is to protect files from deletion by the wrong
person. Deletion is generally controlled by the write permission. If a user
can write to a file/directory then they can also delete said file. Generally
this is acceptable. However there are certain shared areas of the file system
in which only the owner should be able to delete a file. For instance
consider the /tmp area of the file system. This area is used by processes to
write temporary information to disk. However, so that all users can use this
area it is universally writable, meaning that anyone can delete a file. If a
process stores information in /tmp it should be the only process allowed to
delete said information. If the sticky bit is set, then only the file owner can
delete the file. Listing 8.4 shows the /tmp directory with the sticky bit set.
This is represented by the t in the execute permission for all other users.
8.1.3.2 Inode Flags
The four‐byte flag value provides information that tells the ext family of
file systems of any special characteristics of the file or requirements for

accessing the file. Table 8.8 summarises the various flag values. Note that
these flag values are from ext2, ext3 and ext4 file systems. Not all of them
are found in each file system.
Table 8.8 Selection of inode flag values in various ext file systems.
Value
Meaning
0x00000004 Compressed file.
0x00000010 Immutable file [File's location will not be changed on disk].
0x00000020 Append only [Writing can only append content to the file].
0x00000040 Do not dump file.
0x00000080 Do not update access time.
0x00001000 Hash indexed directory.
Ext 3/4
0x00080000 Extent‐based storage used.
0x10000000 Inline storage used.
Be aware that the vast majority of the flags listed in Table 8.8 are dependent
on the file system implementation. Not all file system drivers will
implement all of these flags!
8.1.3.3 Block Pointers
In addition to metadata, the inode structure also contains the location of the
file's content. This information is recorded using block pointers. There are
 four‐byte values in the inode that can be used for block pointers. The
first 
 of these are direct block pointers. The block addresses stored in
these 
 locations are the first 
 blocks of the file's content. The
remaining block pointers are indirect. There is one singly indirect block,
which contains a block pointer to a block containing block pointers, one
doubly indirect block pointer which contains a pointer to a block of singly
indirect block pointers, and finally a single triply indirect block pointer
which contains a pointer to a block consisting of doubly indirect block
pointers. The overall block pointer structure is shown in Figure 8.3.

Figure 8.3 Block pointer structure.
8.1.4 The Data and Inode Bitmaps
The bitmap structures are used to show used and unused items in the block
group. The data bitmap shows the usage status of each block in the block
group, while the inode bitmap performs the same task for the inodes in the
block group. In both cases a single bit is used to represent each item, with a
value of 1 signifying that the value is in use and a value of zero signifying
that the value is not being used.
In the case of the data bitmap the least significant bit of byte 0 represents
block 0 in the block group's data area. The most significant bit in byte 0
represents block 7 in the data area. In byte 1, the least significant bit
represents block 8, and so on. The process is the same in the inode bitmap
except that the first inode number is 1, rather than 0. Hence, the least
significant bit in byte 0 of the inode bitmap represents the allocation status
of inode 1. The most significant bit represents the allocation status of inode
8 and so on.
8.1.5 Locating an Inode
A necessary skill in order to process an ext file system is to locate an inode.
Each block group contains a number of inodes. When locating a particular
inode number it is necessary to first locate the block group in which it can
be found. Using the inodes per block group (
) value from the

(8.1)
(8.2)
superblock, Equation 8.1 provides the formula to locate the block group,
, in which a given inode number, 
, occurs.
However, knowing which block group an inode occurs in is not by itself
sufficient. It is also necessary to know where in the inode table the inode
entry occurs. The starting block of the inode table, 
, is found in the
block group descriptor. The byte offset, 
, to the start of the desired
inode is then given in Equation 8.2 where 
 is the block size in bytes
and 
 is the inode size in bytes.
The final value in Equation 8.2 is the actual byte offset in the file system in
which the inode is found. In ext2 the inode size is always 
 bytes,
meaning that extracting 
 bytes from 
 will provide the entire
contents of the inode which can then be processed using Table 8.6.
8.2 Analysis of ext2
In this section the analysis of the ext2 file system is described in detail.
While this file system is supported by many commercial and open source
tools, it is, as argued throughout this book, necessary for the analyst to
understand how these tools might function. This in turn allows for greater
confidence in the results of file system forensic tools and even for dual tool
verification purposes.
This section follows the same structure as the other file systems presented
in this book. It commences with an introduction to the creation of ext2 file
systems and continues to describe the sample file systems provided in this
book, which are used throughout the remainder of this chapter to
demonstrate the recovery methods generally employed in ext2. Finally, this
section will describe the entire ext2 analysis process.

8.2.1 Creating ext2 File Systems
Before proceeding with analysis it is necessary to determine how ext2 file
systems are created. While some are provided from this book's website for
the reader to practice some of the described analysis techniques, the ability
to create further file systems will aid the reader in perfecting said
techniques.
Linux provides direct support for creating ext file systems. The command
mkfs.ext2 can be used to create a file system. An example of this is shown
in Listing 8.5 in which a basic ext2 file system is created on /dev/sdb1. This
file system label is set to ext2‐FS.
8.2.2 Supplied ext2 Image Files
There are a number of disk image files available from the book's website.
These are summarised in Table 8.9. The file systems shown in Table 8.9
will be used in the remainder of this chapter to demonstrate the analysis
method for ext2 file systems. Readers are advised to follow the examples
while reading.
Table 8.9 Disk images available from the book's website.
File Name
Description
Ext2_V1.E01 A newly created ext2 file system with four files and 1
directory.
Ext2_V2.E01 Ext2_V1.E01 with a hard and symbolic link added and two
files deleted.
Ext2_V3.E01 An Ext2 file system for use in the exercises.
8.2.3 Ext2 Manual Analysis
In order to analyse an ext2 file system forensic tools follow a specific
sequence of steps. These steps are:

1. Process the Superblock: As with most file system analysis tasks the
first step is to process the superblock structure. This structure contains
general information about the filesystem, such as size and volume
label. This structure also allows the number of block groups and the
size of each block group to be determined, allowing the entire file
system to be mapped.
2. Map the Block Groups: Once an overview of the file system has been
gathered, the second step provides deeper knowledge of the structures.
In this step the exact layout of each individual block group in the file
system is discovered. From this step the data area, inode table and
data/inode bitmaps in every block group can be located. These first
two steps are the tasks that the Sleuth Kit tool, fsstat, performs.
3. Process the Root Directory Inode: The next task is to list all the files
that are present in the file system. To do this the root directory must be
located by first locating the root directory's inode and then processing
this structure in order to determine where directory contents are stored.
4. Process the Root Directory: Once the directory entries associated
with the root directory are located, they must be processed to
determine what files/directories are present in the root directory.
5. Process Directories: Each directory found in the root directory must
also be processed in the same manner as that of the root directory
itself. That is, the inode entry for that directory is located and
processed to find the content. Finally the content is processed to
discover what files are present in the directory. This process is repeated
for all subsequent directories that are found. Once complete all
files/directories on the device are listed.
6. Process Files: Finally the file metadata and content is recovered. Both
these tasks involve processing the relevant inode values and, as will be
seen, are very similar to previous tasks performed in order to list the
files in the file system.
The following sections describe each of these steps in detail using the
Ext2_V1.E01 disk image for demonstration purposes.

8.2.3.1 Process the Superblock
From Section 8.1.1 it is known that the superblock structure contains
information about the file system as a whole. While there are generally
multiple copies of the superblock (Table 8.2) the primary superblock always
appears at offset 
 bytes into the file system.

Table 8.10 Selected superblock values from Ext2_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x04 Total # Inodes
0x10000 (
)
0x04
0x04 Total # Blocks
0x10000 (
)
0x08
0x04 # Reserved Blocks
0xCCC (
)
0x0C 0x04 Free Block Count
0xF77A (
)
0x10
0x04 Free Inode Count
0xFFF0 (
)
0x18
0x04 Log Block Size
0x02 
 (
)
0x20
0x04 Blocks/Group
0x8000 (
)
0x28
0x04 Inodes/Group
0x8000 (
)
0x2C 0x04 Mount Time
0x654486BA
2023‐11‐03 05:35:54 UTC
0x30
0x04 Write Time
0x654486C6
2023‐11‐03 05:36:06 UTC
0x34
0x02 # mounts
0x02 (
)
0x38
0x02 Magic
0xEF53
0x40
0x04 Time Last Check
0x6544853E
2023‐11‐03 05:29:34 UTC
0x44
0x04 Check Interval
0x00 (
)
0x54
0x04 First Inode
0x0B (
)
0x58
0x02 Inode Size
0x80 (
)
0x5C 0x04 Compatible Features
0x38
0x60
0x04 Incompatible Features
0x02
0x64
0x04 RO‐Compatible Features 0x03
0x68
0x10 UUID
0x95A7…F38A
0x78
0x10 Volume Name
ext2‐FS
0x88
0x40 Last Mounted Directory /media/ext2

Listing 8.6 shows the superblock in Ext2_V1.E01 with processed values in
Table 8.10. From this it is clear that much information is to be found in the
superblock. For instance there are 
 inodes in the file system along
with 
 blocks. The block size value must be calculated. To do this
take the value for the log block size (
), 0x02, and calculate,
. The same calculation is performed to calculate
the fragment size (although this feature is generally no longer used in
modern versions of ext2).
One of the main things that must be determined is the number of block
groups present in the file system and also the size of each block group. The
size of the block group is given directly in the superblock. From Table 8.10
there are 
 blocks in each block group. Knowing already that there
are a total of 
 blocks in total then there are
block groups in total. These block groups will be numbered 0–1. Note that
the same method can be used with the total number of inodes and the
number of inodes per block group values in order to calculate the total
number of block groups in the file system.
The ext superblock also records certain time values. These are the last
mount time; the last write time; and the last check (fsck) time. These values
are all stored in UTC as unix time values. Other important information
available from the superblock includes the inode size (
 bytes) and the
first inode (
). This is the first inode number that will be used for non‐
system files.
The superblock also provides the volume label (ext2‐FS) and, sometimes
even the directory upon which the file system was last mounted. In the
sample provided this directory is /media/ext2. This information may be of
interest to an investigator.
The compatible, incompatible and RO‐compatible features are also found in
the superblock. These values are 0x38, 0x02 and 0x03, respectively. The
compatible feature value can be rewritten as

. Referring to Table 8.4 shows the file
system supports extended inode attributes, that inodes are not standard sized
and that directories can use hash trees. This process is repeated for the
incompatible and RO‐compatible feature values.
Listing 8.7 shows some of the output of the fsstat command when run on
the Ext2_V1.E01 disk image. In this all of the information manually
gathered from the superblock is present. However, there is further
information provided by the fsstat command in relation to every block
group in the file system. This information is not discovered from the
superblock itself, but instead is found in the block group descriptors. Hence
the next step is to process these structures in order to determine the exact
layout of the file system.

8.2.3.2 Map the Block Groups
In order to map the block groups the block group descriptor (BGD) table is
processed. From Step 1 it is known that the file system present in
Ext2_V1.E01 contains 
 block groups. Section 8.1.2 informs that each
block group descriptor is 
 bytes in size. This means that the entire table
is 
 bytes in size.

The block group descriptor table begins in the block immediately after the
superblock. The first superblock is located at byte offset 
 and is
 bytes in size. This is fully contained in block 0 (which is 
bytes in size). This means that the Block Group Descriptor table is located
in block 1 (byte offset 
). The 
 bytes at this point are shown in
Listing 8.8. The first block group descriptor (BG0) is underlined in Listing
8.8.
Table 8.5 describes the structure of the block group descriptor. Table 8.11
processes the first block group descriptor in Listing 8.8.
Table 8.11 Partially processed BG0 descriptor from Listing 8.8.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x04 Data Bitmap
0x11 (
)
0x04
0x04 Inode Bitmap
0x12 (
)
0x08
0x04 Inode Table
0x13 (
)
0x0C 0x02 Free Block Count
0x7BB0 (
)
0x0E
0x02 Free Inode Count
0x7FF3 (
)
0x10
0x02 Used Directory Count 0x02 (
)
From Table 8.11 the start of the data bitmap (block 
), the inode bitmap
(block 
) and the inode table (block 
) are provided but the size of
the inode table is not present. Remember from the superblock (Table 8.10)
it was discovered that the inode size is 
 bytes, the inodes per block
group is 
 and that the block size is 
 bytes. Using this
information the number of blocks that the inode table occupies can be
calculated as:

This result means that there are 
 blocks in the inode table which
implies that the first block of the inode table is block 
 and the final
block is 
. This means that the data area will begin in block 
.
The structure of BG0 is shown in Figure 8.4. For comparison purposes
Listing 8.9 shows the output from fsstat showing the structure of BG0.

Figure 8.4 BG0 structure in Ext2_V1.E01.

The process shown in this section can be continued for the remaining block
group descriptors in the block group descriptor table (Listing 8.8). Once
complete the output can be compared to that of fsstat.
8.2.3.3 Process Root Directory Inode
Once the entire file system structure is mapped it is then possible to begin
listing the files present in the file system. The first step in this task is to
locate the root directory inode and process this structure.
In the ext2 file system the inode of the root directory is always 2. Hence
this inode must be located. Using Equations 8.1 and 8.2 the block group in
which the inode will be found is firstly calculated using:
Equation 8.2 is then used to calculate inode 2's position in BG0. This is
given as:
Hence the root directory inode can be found at byte offset 
. Every
inode in this file system is 
 bytes in size. Listing 8.10 shows the
contents of the root directory inode. The processed values are shown in
Table 8.12.

Table 8.12 Partially processed root directory inode in Ext2_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x02 Mode
0x41ED
Directory rwxr‐xr‐x
0x02
0x02 UID
0x00 (
)
0x04
0x04 Size
0x1000 (
)
0x08
0x04 Access Time
0x65448613
2023‐11‐03 05:33:07 UTC
0x0C 0x04 Change Time
0x654486C1
2023‐11‐03 05:36:01 UTC
0x10
0x04 Modified Time
0x654486C1
2023‐11‐03 05:36:01 UTC
0x14
0x04 Deletion Time
0x00 (
)
0x28
0x3C Content Location 0x413 (
)
In order to proceed the contents of the root directory itself are located. This
is found using the block pointers. As discussed in Section 8.1.3.3 the inode
contains 12 direct block pointers and 3 indirect block pointers. In the case
of the root directory inode only a single block pointer is allocated. The
value of that is 0x413 (
), meaning that the content of the root
directory can be found in block number 
. The next step is to process
this content.

8.2.3.4 Process the Root Directory
Listing 8.11 shows the contents of the root directory in Ext2_V1.E01. From
this output filenames are seen in the ASCII values. These can be compared
to the output of the fls command (Listing 8.12) showing similar content.
The next step is to process this information to determine the actual
filenames present in the directory.
In ext root directory entries are not of a fixed length. This is due to the
variable length filename field that is held with an entry. The structure of a
root directory entry is given in Table 8.13. The root directory entries in
Listing 8.11 are processed in Table 8.14.
Table 8.13 Root directory entry structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Inode
The inode number of the file/directory.
0x04
0x02 Record Length
The size of the directory entry in bytes.
0x06
0x01 Name Length (n) The size of the filename in bytes.
0x07
0x01 File Type
See Table 8.15.
0x08
n
Filename
The name of the file.

Table 8.14 Processed root directory entries.
Record 1
Record 2
Record 3
Inode
0x02 (
)
0x02 (
)
0x0B (
)
Record Length 0x0C (
)
0x0C (
) 0x14 (
)
Name Length
0x01 (
)
0x02 (
)
0x0A (
)
Type
0x02 – Dir.
0x02 – Dir.
0x02 – Dir.
Filename
.
..
lost+found
Record 4
Record 5
Record 6
Inode
0x8001 (32,
) 0x0C (
) 0x0D (
)
Record Length 0x10 (
)
0x10 (
) 0xFB4 (4,
)
Name Length
0x05 (
)
0x08 (
)
0x08 (
)
Type
0x02 – Dir
0x01 – File
0x01 – File
Filename
Files
lake.jpg
info.txt
Table 8.15 Possible file type field values in a root directory entry.
Value Meaning
0x00 Unknown file type
0x01 Regular file
0x02 Directory
0x03 Character device
0x04 Block device
0x05 Buffer file
0x06 Socket file
0x07 Symbolic link
Table 8.14 shows the same information that Sleuth Kit's fls command
provided (Listing 8.12). There are a number of items of note about the
directory entry structures. These include:

Directory Entry Slack Space: It is possible for directory entries to
have slack space. This can occur when a directory name is changed to
a shorter name. The directory record length will remain the same as the
original (so that it is possible to correctly skip to the next record) but
the name length will be reduced. Information that exists between the
end of the name and the end of the directory entry is slack space.
Final Directory Entry Length: The record length for the final
directory entry in a directory always runs to the end of the block.
Hence the final record entry has a length of 0xFB4 bytes – much
longer than actually needed.
./.. Directories: Every directory in ext contains a . and .. directory.
These are the current and parent directories, respectively. In the case of
the root directory, the current directory is the root directory which is
inode 2; however, there is no parent, so the .. directory is also inode 2
in this case. You can see this for yourself on a Linux system, by
running the command cd / to change to the root directory and then
running cd ... The second command will ‘change’ to the parent
directory, which is still /.
lost+found: This directory is found on all Linux/Unix/MacOS file
systems. It is used in the case of file system checking tools such as
fsck discovering errors. It stores corrupted files that were discovered
by these tools.
8.2.3.5 Process Directories
Using the method presented in Step 4, the same actions are performed for
all discovered directories. Table 8.14 shows that there are two other
directories present, lost+found (Inode 0x0B) and Files (Inode 0x8001). It is
left as an exercise for the reader to process these directories and rebuild the
entire file system content.
8.2.3.6 Process Files
The final step in the analysis of an ext2 file system is to recover file
metadata and content. The recovery of file metadata involves the processing
of the inode values as shown in Step 3. Listing 8.13 shows the output of the
istat command when run on inode 
 (info.txt).

From this output it is clear that the inode structure is being processed in
order to gather this information. The UID/GID values, the mode and file
permissions,6 the file size, the number of links, the timestamps, etc. are all
found in the inode structure. Hence the metadata information of any file can
be accessed, by first locating the inode in the file system and then
processing this value.
The final step in analysis is to extract the file's content. It has already been
shown how the root directory content can be extracted. However, in the
case of a directory, the content always occupies entire blocks (the file size
in that case was 
 bytes). Listing 8.13 shows that the file size is only
 bytes in size. In order to extract this the inode is processed to
discover the block(s) occupied by the file in question. The output from istat
shows that inode 
 contains only a single direct block pointer (
). The command shown in Listing 8.14 will extract the content of this file.

The info.txt file is a small file that only occupied a single block in the file
system. Now consider a larger file, in this case inode 
. Listing 8.15
shows the actual content of the inode itself along with the command used to
extract it. The file size and block pointers are highlighted.
Analysing this shows the file size to be 0xE348 (
) bytes, much
larger than the 
 byte block size. Hence this file will require multiple
blocks in order to store its content. Processing the 
 direct blocks gives
values of 0x8601–0x860C (
–
). In this example the
singly indirect block pointer value is also used. The value of this is 0x8414
(
). The contents of this are shown in Listing 8.16. This clearly
shows that three further blocks are occupied by this file. These blocks are
0x860D (
)–0x860F (
).

The file size is 0xE348 (
) bytes; hence, the file will occupy 
blocks in their entirety. Fourteen blocks allow for 
bytes, meaning that block 
 contains 
bytes. The remaining 
 bytes are slack space.
Fourteen blocks could be extracted followed by the 
 bytes from block
 and combine these to get the file or, as all blocks are contiguous,
 bytes could be extracted from the start of the first block (if the
file were fragmented this is not possible). Listing 8.17 shows this approach
being used to extract the file's contents. The resulting file is shown in
Figure 8.5.

Figure 8.5 The extracted lake.jpg file.
The method that has been presented in this section is the basic method used
by all file system forensic tools when processing an ext2 file system. The
remainder of this chapter will focus on some of the more advanced topics in
the ext2 file system, such as handling fragmented files, deleted files and
both hard and soft links.
8.3 Ext2 Advanced Analysis
The basic tasks presented to this point allow for the analysis of most ext2
file systems. However, there are some commonly encountered items in the
ext2 file system which require a little more care during analysis. In this
section we will examine some of these topics, including fragmented files
(Section 8.3.1), links (Section 8.3.2) and deleted files (Section 8.3.3).
8.3.1 Fragmented Files
The files recovered to this point have been contiguous on disk. There is no
requirement for files to be contiguous; hence, it may be required to handle
fragmented files during analysis. The Ext2_V1.E01 disk image contains
one fragmented file, Files/beach.jpg ‐ inode 
. Listing 8.18 shows
the output of the istat command on this file.

Listing 8.18 clearly shows the fragmented nature of the file's content. The
first 16 blocks of content are contiguous, from block 
–
,
the next block is found in block 
.
But how are the block pointers actually stored? Listing 8.19 shows the
inode for this file. The block group containing inode 
 is found
using:
Its position in the inode table in block group 1 is given by:
The inode table in block group 1 begins at block number 
 (found
by processing the relevant block group descriptor). This means that the byte
offset to the inode is 
. Listing
8.19 provides the contents of this inode with the file size and block pointers
underlined.

The 12 direct block pointers contain the values 0x8610–0x861B (
–
). The next block pointer is a singly indirect block pointer. The
value of this is 0x8415 (
). An excerpt from the contents of this
block is shown in Listing 8.20.
This block contains a list of four byte block pointers. The list continues
until the first zero value block pointer is encountered. In block 
there are 
 further block pointers found. The first four of these are
contiguous with the initial 12 direct block pointers seen in Listing 8.19 with
values 0x861C–0x861F (
–
). The next block pointer
points to 0x430 (
). Each of the remaining block pointers is
processed in order to rebuild the entire file content.
8.3.2 Links
Links are a means provided by Linux (and other Unix‐like operating
systems) to allow for multiple references to a file to exist in the file system.
The inode structure (Table 8.6) contains the number of links to a file.
Listing 8.21 shows the creation of both soft (also called symbolic) and hard
links. In both cases links are created to the file lake.jpg. The resulting disk
image is available as Ext2_V2.E01.

Take note of the inodes in Listing 8.21. The softlink file has a different
inode number than its source. The source file (lake.jpg) has inode 
while the file softlink.jpg has inode 
. In contrast to this the hard link
has the exact same inode number as that of the source file (
). Listings
8.22 and 8.23 show the output of the istat command on inodes 
 and
, respectively.

In the case of the hard link the number of links to the file is increased – 
there are now two links to the file. The content is identical in both cases. If
the original file is deleted the content will still exist through the hard link.
In the case of the softlink there is no direct block address present. The file
type is now marked as l, compared to r (regular file) for the hard link.
Listing 8.24 shows the actual content of the inode. The most significant
nibble of the mode value is 0xA signifying this to be a symbolic (soft) link
file.
In the softlink case, instead of containing block pointers, the inode contains
the actual path to the source file. The number of links to the source file
would still be 1. Hence if the source file is deleted, the symbolic link will
no longer point to a valid file, rendering the link invalid also.

8.3.3 Deleted Files
The next topic that must be discussed is that of deleted files. From other file
systems such as FAT it is known that a file is often merely marked as
deleted in the metadata structure. All the content and metadata is still intact.
But what occurs in ext2? For this topic the Ext2_V2.E01 is used in which
the files Files/delete.txt and beach.jpg have been deleted. Previous
analysis of the file system showed that before the beach.jpg file was
deleted the first block of file content was found to be 0x8610. Listing 8.25
shows the beginning of this block after deletion. It is clear that the file's
contents are still present on the disk. Indeed re‐running the command in
Listing 8.17 allows for the file to be recovered in its entirety.
Next the inode itself is examined. Listing 8.26 shows the contents of inode
. Deletion has caused a number of changes to the file system.
Firstly the file size has become zero, secondly the deletion time has been set
and finally the block pointers have been zero'd.
This information is confirmed by the istat command as shown in Listing
8.27. From this the conclusion can be drawn that while some metadata will
still exist for a deleted file and that the contents of the file will still exist, it
is impossible to link the metadata to the file content.

Finally checking the root directory will show that the file name/inode
number has not been overwritten in this case.
8.4 Summary
In this chapter the ext2 file system was introduced. The main structures of
this file system were introduced and a method of recovering file content and
metadata was proposed. Additionally some of the more advanced topics in
ext2, such as fragmentation, deletion and links, were introduced to the
reader. In the next chapter the examination of the ext family of file systems
continues. While all later versions (ext3 and ext4) are very similar to ext2 in
overall structure there are some differences that make their analysis slightly
different. Hence the next chapter can be viewed as discussing these
differences!
Exercises
In relation to the ext2 file system supplied in Ext2_V3.E01 answer the
following questions. You should attempt to answer these questions
manually and verify your results using a forensic tool.
1. What is the volume name?

2. What block size is used in this file system?
3. What is the inode size?
4. How many block groups are present in this file system?
5. Map the structure of BG0.
6. In relation to inode 
 answer the following questions.
a. In which block group is this inode found?
b. What is the byte offset to this inode?
c. What are the file permissions?
d. In which block(s) are the file contents stored?
e. What is the file size in bytes?
f. What is the MD5 sum of this file?
7. When the file system contents are listed using fls it would appear that
two files have the same inode number (
). How is this possible?
8. List the contents of the root directory in this file system.
Bibliography
Barik, M.S., Gupta, G., Sinha, S. et al. (2007). An efficient technique for
enhancing forensic capabilities of Ext2 file system. Digital Investigation
4: 55–61.
Card, R., Ts'o, T., and Tweedie, S. (2001). Design and Implementation of
the Second Extended Filesystem [Internet]. e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net.
https://e2fsprogs.sourceforge.net/ext2intro.html (accessed 13 August
2024).
Carrier, B. (2005). File System Forensic Analysis. Boston, MA;
London:Addison‐Wesley.
Dilger, A.E. (2002). Online ext2 and ext3 Filesystem Resizing. Ottawa
Linux Symposium 2002 (26 Jun 2002), p. 117.

Ext2 (2024). OSDev Wiki [Internet]. wiki.osdev.org.
https://wiki.osdev.org/Ext2 (accessed 13 August 2024).
Heintzkill, R. (2021). Linux Hard Links versus Soft Links Explained
[Internet]. CBT Nuggets Blog.
https://www.cbtnuggets.com/blog/certifications/open-source/linux-hard-
links-versus-soft-links-explained (accessed 13 August 2024).
Phillips, D. (2001). A directory index for EXT2. 5th Annual Linux
Showcase & Conference (ALS 01).
Piper, S., Davis, M., Manes, G., and Shenoi, S. (2005). Detecting hidden
data in Ext2/Ext3 file systems. Advances in Digital Forensics: IFIP
International Conference on Digital Forensics, National Center for
Forensic Science, Orlando, Florida (13–16 February 2005), 245–256.
Springer US.
Poirier, D. (2001). The Second Extended File System [Internet].
www.nongnu.org. https://www.nongnu.org/ext2-doc/ext2.html (accessed
13 August 2024).
Polstra, P. (2015). Linux Forensics: With Python and Shell Scripting.
Createspace Independent Publishing Platform.
Notes
1 Depending on the size of the device, the final block group may be smaller
than the others.
2 The path on which it was mounted is contained in the superblock;
however, the superblock provides no information regarding the machine
upon which it was mounted.
3 In this case the superblock is being extracted from a partition on a
physical device (/dev/sdb1). This value can be replaced with a raw
image filename in order to extract the superblock from an image file.
4 In the case of early ext2 file systems the superblock and the block group
descriptor table were found in every block group.

5 Generally the final block group will be smaller than the other block
groups. The final block group occupies the remaining block groups in
the file system.
6 Sleuth Kit presents the file type as an extra permission bit. The first r in
the permission string refers to a regular file.
OceanofPDF.com

9
The EXT3/EXT4 File Systems
By the late 1990s ext2 was beginning to show its age. At the time, newer
file systems containing modern features such as journaling were becoming
increasingly common. As ext2 did not contain any of these features the need
for a third extended file system was realised. Development of ext3 was first
proposed in 1998 and fully integrated into the Linux kernel in November
2001.
However, as time passed it was again realised that ext3 was no longer fit for
purpose. This was mainly due to the addressing issues that it faced. For
modern devices the ability to create larger files (and volumes) was essential.
Ext4 is more an extension of ext3 than a new file system. It was initially
created as a set of extensions for ext3 but the project was forked during
development to become ext4. Development of ext4 concluded in October
2008 with its inclusion in the Linux kernel.
This chapter will examine the developments in terms of the ext file system
family. Chapter 8 described the ext2 file system structures and showed how
these can be processed to recover file and metadata content. This chapter
will proceed to show how ext3 and ext4 differ from ext2. Unless otherwise
stated the information used to process an ext2 file system is also used to
process these file systems. Before commencing, the disk images used for
this chapter are introduced.
9.1 Supplied Image Files
Four distinct image files are used throughout this chapter, an ext3 file
system with journaling, an ext3 file system with HTree directories, an ext4
file system using multiple storage mechanisms and an ext4 file system with
extended attributes and deleted files. Table 9.1 summarises these image
files.

Table 9.1 Ext3/4 disk images available from the book's website.
Image File
Description
Ext3_V1.E01 An ext3 file system with journaling.
Ext3_V2.E01 An ext3 file system with HTree directories enabled.
Ext4_V1.E01 An ext4 file system with extents, inline storage and
symbolic links.
Ext4_V2.E01 An ext4 file system with extended attributes and deleted
files.
9.2 The ext3 File System
The ext3 file system is an extension of ext2 which provides a number of
added features. One of the overriding design goals of ext3 was to ensure its
backwards compatibility with ext2. This meant that ext2 file systems could
be upgraded in place (without the need of back‐up/restore).
Ext3 added a number of new features to ext2. The most important of these,
from a file system forensic perspective, was the journal. The journal
(Section 9.2.1) records changes to the file system that have yet to be
committed to the file system. The use of a journal reduces the time required
to restore a crashed file system and also reduces the likelihood of file
system corruption.
In addition to the journal ext3 introduced two other features, online resizing
of the file system and the use of HTree directory indexing. Online resizing
allows the file system to grow while mounted. Consider the scenario in
which a deployment server is running out of disk space. Generally this file
system would need to be taken offline (unmounted) and its data relocated to
a larger file system. With ext3 this is not necessary as the file system itself
can be resized when mounted. This means that there is no need to take a file
system offline in order to allocate more space. While highly beneficial for
system administrators this feature has little relevance to digital forensics.
HTree directory indexing was introduced to improve the efficiency of the
ext file system. Ext2 used a linear structure for directory indexing.
Directory entries appeared one after the other in a directory (Section 8.2.3).

These entries were not even of fixed size (as they contain the variable
length file name) and as such could not be quickly searched. The modern
file system approach is to use a B‐Tree structure (e.g. NTFS) for directory
indexing. However, this can lead to trees with many levels and potential
data loss if high‐level nodes become corrupt. The B‐Tree structure is also
very complex to implement and was considered to be opposed to ext's
design philosophy. Hence a compromise was reached which involved the
use of HTrees. These trees have much higher fan‐out (number of children
per node) than B‐Trees, meaning that more files can be represented using a
smaller tree height.
Other than the features mentioned above, the structures in ext3 are identical
to those found in ext2. The remainder of this section will examine the
forensic implications of the ext journal and also of HTree directory
indexing.
9.2.1 The Ext Journal
A file system journal records changes that have been made to the file
system before they are committed to disk. In this way the journal serves as a
protection against crashes that might destroy file system consistency. Of
course the journal also has wonderful applications for digital forensic
analysts, as they look into the past as it were, potentially viewing deleted
files and older versions of current files.
The journal in ext (and in most file systems) is a fixed‐size file that is
updated in a circular manner. This implies that when the journal is full it
will begin to overwrite the start of the file. The basic journal storage unit is
the block, so if a single inode is updated, the contents of the entire block
that contains the inode in question will be copied to the journal.
There are three journaling levels available in ext3 (and also ext4):
Journal: Records all modified metadata blocks and data blocks in the
journal. This is very slow as data is written twice to disk, once to the
journal and once to the main part of the disk. From a forensic
perspective it is also the most informative as it contains both content
and metadata.

Ordered: This is the default type in ext3 – the metadata is recorded in
the journal, but data is flushed before metadata is updated. This
ensures that consistency is maintained but only metadata is available to
the analyst.
Write‐back: This is the fastest journal type in which the metadata is
recorded in the journal and the data is flushed by the file system. This
means that there may be a delay in flushing the data. Both ordered and
write‐back journaling record only metadata in the journal (the
difference is in the timing of the journal metadata and content write
operations), and hence from a forensic perspective both are of similar
value.
In general the journal file is located at inode 8 in the file system. This can
be checked in the superblock. Using the supplied file, Ext3_V1.E01, the
contents of this file system are shown in Listing 9.1.
Running fsstat on the supplied disk image shows that, as expected, the
journal is located at inode 8 (Listing 9.2).
Examining the output from the istat command for inode 
 shows that
the information about the direct blocks is no longer present (Listing 9.3).
This is confirmed by analysing the inode's underlying data itself (Listing
9.4) which shows that all direct block pointers have been overwritten.
Hence, while the metadata for the file is still present, there is no indication

of where the file content is located. Instead it is necessary to examine the
journal to determine the actual location of the file's content (if it is still
present on disk).
The ext journal structure is shown in Figure 9.1. The journal begins with a
Journal Superblock (JSB) which describes the structure of the journal as a
whole. It is a much simpler structure than the file system superblock.
Transactions are recorded sequentially after this, with each receiving a new
sequence number. As stated previously, once the end of the journal is
encountered it loops back to the beginning, overwriting the data previously
found at that location. Each transaction is composed of a descriptor block
which describes the structure of the transaction. This is then followed by

one or more metadata blocks (and data blocks if full journaling is used).
These are the actual blocks that were updated. The transaction ends with a
commit block, in the case of successful transactions and a revoke block
otherwise.
Figure 9.1 Ext journal structure.
The Sleuth Kit provides a set of commands which can access the ext
journal. The jls command will list information about the blocks contained in
the journal, while jcat will allow for particular blocks to be extracted from
the journal. The output from jls is shown in Listing 9.5.

Listing 9.5 shows the journal superblock (JSB – Block 0) and some
information from that structure. Block 1 contains a descriptor for sequence
8 followed by 7 metadata blocks (2–8) and a commit block in block 9.
Recall that the deleted file was located in inode 
 (Listing 9.1). The
output from istat (Listing 9.3) showed that the data blocks for this inode are
no longer present; however, it may be possible to recover the file content
using the journal!
Firstly it is necessary to calculate which block on the file system contains
inode 
. It is known from fsstat (or the superblock) that there are
 inodes in each block group, and therefore inode 
 must be in
block group 
. Again from fsstat it is determined that the inode table
begins in block 
. If each inode is 
 bytes in size and blocks are
 bytes, then inode 
 must occur in the second block of the inode
table, i.e. block 
. Next it is necessary to search the output of jls to find
any mention of block 
. We see that journal blocks 
, 
 and 
contain changes to block 
 (remember there are 
 inodes in a block so
not all of these changes will refer to inode 
, but an old copy of the

inode may be found). These blocks can be extracted using the jcat
command as shown in Listing 9.6.
Inode 
 will be the fifth inode present in the inode table block meaning
that it is necessary to skip 
 bytes in each block. The data in J5.dd and
J13.dd are shown in Listing 9.7.
As each block on this file system is 
 bytes in size, and inode 
's
file size is 
 bytes, the contents of block 0x202 (
) can be found
using the command shown in Listing 9.8.

Note that examining J20.dd will show a different block for content (
). Examining the content of this block will also locate the file's content. This
block stored another version of this file. Analysts can study the timestamp
values that are present in each of these metadata blocks to determine the
order of events that are logged in the journal.
At this stage Sleuth Kit tools can be used to recover information from the
journal. The next question to ask is how do these tools perform that
recovery task. The overall structure of the journal has already been
described. It commences with a journal superblock, which is followed by a
list of transactions. Each transaction contains a journal descriptor block,
followed by a list of data blocks, terminated by a commit or revocation
block. The next step is to determine the underlying structure of these
various items.
The first thing to note is that the journaling structures used in ext3 (and 4)
are big‐endian by default. This is quite unusual in ext (and in file systems
in general!). Every superblock, commit, revoke and descriptor block begins
with the same 
 byte journal header. The structure of this header is
shown in Table 9.2.
Table 9.2 Ext3 journal block header structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Magic
All journal blocks begin with the JBD2 magic
header (0xC03B3998).
0x04
0x04 Block
Type
Field describing the block type of the current
block:
‐ 1: Descriptor block
‐ 2: Commit block
‐ 3: Superblock (V1)
‐ 4: Superblock (V2)
‐ 5: Revocation block
0x08
0x04 Seq.
Num.
The transaction ID containing this block.

Recall the output from the jls command when run on Ext3_V1.E01 (Listing
9.5). Using Table 9.2 it should be possible to rebuild that structure. The
journal file (journal.dd) was first recovered using icat. Each block begins
with the hex values (0xC03B3998) which can be used to search for journal
blocks as shown in Listing 9.9. The offsets provided here are offsets to the
start of the block. Each block is 
 bytes in size, so dividing each
offset by this gives a list of blocks as: 0, 1, 9, 10, 17, 18 and 23. Comparing
this to the output of jls confirms that these blocks are the version 2
Superblock (Block 0), descriptor blocks (blocks 1, 10 and 18) and commit
blocks (blocks 9, 17 and 23).
Each of these block types then needs to be processed individually. Analysis
of the journal begins with the journal superblock. The version 1 superblock
structure is shown in Table 9.3 with the version 2 superblock additions
shown in Table 9.4.
Table 9.3 Ext3 journal superblock version 1 structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x0C Header
Block header structure (Table 9.2).
0x0C 0x04 Block Size
Size of each journal block in bytes.
0x10
0x04 Num. Blocks Total number of blocks in the journal.
0x14
0x04 First Block
The first block of journal information.
0x18
0x04 First Commit The first commit ID expected.
0x1C 0x04 Start Block
Block number of the starting block of the log.
0x20
0x04 Error
Error number.

Table 9.4 Ext3 journal superblock version 2 structure. The first 0x24 bytes
are common with the version 1 structure (Table 9.3).
Offset Size Name
Description
0x24
0x04 Compat.
Features
Only one possible value 0x01 meaning that
checksums are enabled.
0x28
0x04 Incompat.
Features
Possible Values:
‐ 0x01: Journal has revocation blocks;
‐ 0x02: 64‐bit block numbers;
‐ 0x04: Asynchronous commit;
‐ 0x08: Version 2 checksum;
‐ 0x10: Version 3 checksum.
0x2C 0x04 RO Compat.
Features
Not implemented.
0x30
0x10 UUID
UUID for the journal.
The superblock must be consulted in order to process the descriptor blocks.
Specifically it is needed to determine if the version 3 checksum and 64‐bit
block flags are set. If not then the descriptor blocks can be processed using
the structure in Table 9.5. If they are set then the structure in Table 9.6 is
necessary. The descriptor block will describe all of the blocks that are in the
transaction record.

Table 9.5 Default journal descriptor block structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Block
Num.
The block number represented by this entry.
0x04
0x02 Checksum
A checksum value.
0x06
0x02 Flags
Possible values:
0x01: On disk block escaped;
0x02: Same UUID as previous;
0x04: Data block deleted by transaction;
0x08: Last tag in block.
0x08
0x10 UUID
Not present if same UUID as previous flag is
set.
Table 9.6 Version 3 journal descriptor block structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Block Num.
(Lo)
Least significant 
‐bits of the block
number.
0x04
0x04 Flags
Possible values:
0x01: On disk block escaped;
0x02: Same UUID as previous;
0x04: Data block deleted by transaction;
0x08: Last tag in block.
0x08
0x04 Block Num.
(Hi)
Most significant 
‐bits of the block
number.
0x0C 0x04 Checksum
A checksum value.
0x10
0x10 UUID
Not present if same UUID as previous flag
is set.
Listing 9.10 shows the contents of block 
 in the journal file found in
Ext_V1.E01. The journal header shows that this is a descriptor block for
sequence number 
. Alternate descriptors are highlighted in Listing 9.10.

In the first descriptor the ‘Same UUID as Previous’ flag is not set. This
means that the entry is 
 bytes in size. Subsequent entries in this
descriptor block have this flag set, meaning that they do not contain a
UUID field and hence consist only of 
 bytes. The processed values are
shown in Table 9.7. This output can be compared to that of jls in which the
block numbers are shown (Listing 9.5).
Table 9.7 Processed entries from the Ext3_V1.E01 descriptor block (block
number 
).
Entry 1 Entry 2 Entry 3 Entry 4
Block 0x44
0x144
0x01
0x45
C‐sum 0x00
0x00
0x00
0x00
Flags
0x00
0x02
0x02
0x02
UUID 0x00
—
—
—
Entry 5 Entry 6 Entry 7
Block 0x42
0x02
0x43
C‐Sum 0x00
0x00
0x00
Flags
0x02
0x02
0x0A
UUID —
—
—
Further information about processing of the ext journal structures can be
found in the Kernel wiki.1
9.2.2 HTree Directory Indexing
The traditional ext2 file system used a linear array for directory entries.
This structure contained no internal organisation. In order to locate a

particular file in a directory, potentially all files need to be searched.
Additionally, directory entries are of variable length meaning that it was
impossible to jump to a specific entry, rather 
 entries had to be
processed in order to locate the 
th entry in the directory. This inherent
inefficiency led to the development of HTree (Hash Tree)‐based directory
indexing.
HTrees are similar to B‐Trees as seen in NTFS (Chapter 7). They differ in
the overall structure in which a HTree has a maximum depth of only two
layers and therefore much fanout (there exist many children for each node).
HTrees are indexed based on a hash of the filename and not on the filename
itself. The use of HTrees increased the practical limits for the number of
files per directory in Linux systems from multiple thousands of files for
linear array directories, to tens of millions of files for HTree‐based
directories.
Although HTrees are supported in ext3 and ext42 smaller directories in
these file systems still use a linear directory structure. In the case of larger
directories with many files, the HTree directory structure is utilised. To
determine if linear or HTree directory entries are in use the inode flags are
consulted. Listing 9.11 shows the contents of the root directory's inode in
Ext3_V2.E01 with the inode flags highlighted. Referring to Table 8.8
shows that the bit which is set (0x1000) refers to the use of tree‐based
directory indexing. Hence this directory uses a HTree structure for directory
entry storage.
Listing 9.11 also shows the content location for the directory itself. Notice
that all 
 direct block pointers are in use along with one singly indirect
block pointer. The twelve direct block pointers are: 0x413, 0x141E, 0x141F,

0x1420, 0x1421, 0x1422, 0x1423, 0x1424, 0x1425, 0x1426, 0x1427 and
0x1428. The indirect block pointer is 0x1429. For ease of further analysis
icat can be used to recover this ‘file’. This is achieved through icat
Ext3_V2.E01 2 
root.dd. Further analysis will be performed on the
root.dd file.
The ext HTree contains three types of node. A single root node is found at
the start of the root directory file. This then links to internal or leaf nodes.
Leaf nodes in the HTree structure are merely a linear array of directory
entries which can be processed as with the traditional ext2 processing
algorithms. The leaf nodes are sometimes referred to as directory entry
blocks as they merely contain traditional directory entries. The root node
contains a set of hash values and the block number that files hashing to that
value can be found in. In the case of sufficient collisions to require more
than a single block, the major hash value will point to an intermediate node
(also called the directory index block) which uses minor hashes to map to
subsequent leaf nodes. The overall structure of the HTree is shown in
Figure 9.2.
Figure 9.2 HTree structure.
As stated previously the root node is found in the first block of the
recovered directory. Figure 9.2 provides an idea of the root node's structure.

For backwards compatibility the root node begins with two traditional
directory entries for the . and .. directories, respectively. This is followed by
four zero bytes. These zeros fool ext2 file systems, which are unable to
process HTrees, into believing that the directory entries are finished. This is
due to the special meaning of inode zero which is that no further processing
should take place. The zero value is followed by a 
 byte HTree Root
Header structure. Listing 9.12 shows the contents of the root node in
Ext3_V2.E01 while Table 9.8 shows the structure of this root node and the
interpreted values.

Table 9.8 HTree root node structure with interpreted values from Listing
9.12. Offset 0x00 represents the beginning of the unhighlighted area of raw
data, after the zero inode (highlighted).
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x01 Hash
Version
Hash algorithm used. The algorithm is one
of:
0x01 (
)
0x0 – Legacy;
0x1 – Half MD4;
0x2 – Tea;
0x3 – Legacy (unsigned);
0x04 – Half MD4 (unsigned);
0x5 – Tea (unsigned).
0x01
0x01 Header
Length
Length of the record header structure.
Note that this does not include the zero
hash block number (
 bytes).
0x08 (
)
0x02
0x01 Levels
The number of levels in the tree. This
value can't exceed 
.
0x00 (
)
0x03
0x01 Unused
Unused.
0x00 (
)
0x04
0x02 Limit
Maximum number of index entries (plus 1
for the header) that can follow this header.
0x1FC
(
)
0x06
0x02 Count
The actual number of index entries that
follow the header (plus 1 for the header).
0x1A3
(
)
0x08
0x04 Block
The block number (within the directory
file) associated with a zero hash value.
0x01 (
)
0x0C 0x08 Entries
Each structure contains a four‐byte hash
and a four‐byte block number (relative to
the directory file). The count value (offset
0x06) informs the analyst of the number of
entries present in this structure.

The entries follow the header and consist of a four‐byte hash value followed
by a four‐byte block number. This block number is relative to the beginning
of the directory file. The first entry (underlined) in Listing 9.12 has a hash
value of 0x0074499A with a corresponding block number of 0x19B. The
contents of this block are shown in Listing 9.13 which clearly shows
traditional directory entries.
Interior nodes begin with a fake record, which is merely four 0x00 bytes.
This is followed by a two‐byte record length field which will hide the
subsequent header information. The use of zero inode values allows for the
entire directory content to be read by ext2 file system drivers which do not
provide support for the HTree structure as these drivers will cease
processing the block on encountering a zero inode.
9.3 The Ext4 File System
Since 2008 the fourth extended file system (ext4) has become standard on
most Linux distributions. This file system is backward compatible with
previous versions but adds modern storage methods to the ext file system.
Ext4 added a raft of new features which distinguish it from previous
versions. From a file system forensic perspective this section will cover the
most important features of ext4.

Firstly the new inode structure is described. While compatible with the
previous inode structure the default size is now 
 bytes allowing more
space for extra metadata information. The data storage mechanisms are
dramatically changed in ext4, with extents being used as the default storage
mechanism rather than block pointers. This allows for more efficient
storage of large files and follows the storage mechanism used in most
modern file systems. In addition to this, ext4 also allows for inline storage
(analogous to resident $DATA attributes in NTFS) which allow for small
file content to be stored in the metadata (i.e. inode) structure itself. Ext4
also includes a creation time and improves the granularity of all timestamps
in the file system (nanosecond as opposed to second granularity). The
remainder of this section will examine these new structures in detail.
9.3.1 Large Inodes
Ext4 defaults to an inode size of 
 bytes, twice that of previous
versions of the ext file system. The first 
 bytes of the ext4 inode are
identical to those of previous ext versions (Table 8.6). Table 9.9 shows the
meaning of the extra bytes in the ext4 inode.

Table 9.9 Ext4 inode structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x80 Ext2 Inode
Structure as shown in Table 8.6.
0x80
0x02 Extra Size
The extra bytes (above 
) occupied by this
inode.
0x82
0x02 Checksum
(Hi)
Upper 
 bits of the inode checksum.
0x84
0x04 ctime (extra) Extra metadata change time value providing
nanosecond granularity.
0x88
0x04 mtime
(extra)
Extra content modification time value
providing nanosecond granularity.
0x8C 0x04 atime (extra) Extra access time value providing nanosecond
granularity.
0x90
0x04 Creation
Time
Unix time value representing the file creation
time.
0x94
0x04 crtime
(extra)
Extra creation time value providing
nanosecond granularity.
0x98
0x04 Version (Hi) Upper 
 bits for version number.
0x9C 0x04 Project ID
Project ID value.
The size of the ext4 inode is generally 
 bytes allocated on disk but not
all of this is used. In the extended inode structure the first value (2 bytes at
0x80) provides the size of the inode above that of the ext2 inode size (
 bytes). The remaining bytes in the inode can then be used for
extended attributes. However, from a file system forensic perspective the
most interesting information in the extended inode is that of time stamps
which are covered in the next section.
9.3.1.1 Timestamps
Listing 9.14 shows the output from two istat commands. The first of these
is run on an ext2 file system while the second is run on ext4. From this
output it is clear that the ext4 file system provides an extra timestamp value
(that of creation time) and also provides nanosecond granularity.

The extra detail is achieved through the addition of a creation time value
and the use of four extra bytes for each timestamp which store the
nanosecond component (and a little more, as will be seen in a moment).
These extra fields are found in the extended ext4 inode structure (Table
9.9). The extra timestamps and improved granularity allow for the
generation of more precise and detailed timelines for ext4 than for previous
versions of the extended file system.
Consider the output of the stat3 command on the file reflect.jpg in
Ext4_V1.E01 (Listing 9.15). The file's access time was altered using touch
‐a ‐t 212201011200.
Listing 9.16 shows the output of Sleuth Kit's istat command on this
particular inode in the filesystem.4 Notice the access time value is from the
year 1985, rather than 2122 as seen in the output from stat. What has
happened? Which of these values is correct?

From knowledge of previous versions of the ext file system it is known that
Unix time expires in 2038. This is due to the fact that Unix time
traditionally was a 
 bit signed integer value measuring the number of
seconds since 1 January 1970. This allows for a maximum value of 
seconds which provides a final time of 19 January 2038 at 3:14:07 AM.
This was a potential issue in the ext file system going forward. Therefore
ext4 made two significant changes to the timestamp format.
The first of these changes was to store the original access, modified and
changed time fields as unsigned values. This allows for 
 possible values
which means that Unix time would now expire on 7 February 2106 at
6:28:15 AM. However, even this value is unable to explain the time value
shown in the stat output (Listing 9.15). The year 2122 exceeds the
maximum year possible in a 32‐bit system.
This leads to the second change. From Table 9.9 the extra fields in the inode
structure are shown. Each of the access, modification and change times
have an extra field associated with them. This is often interpreted as being
nanoseconds; however, it is actually more than mere nanoseconds. The two
least significant bits represent the high value bits of the basic time. This
means that 
 seconds can now be represented (the 
 bits from the
original inode timestamp value along with the 
 extra bits from the file
system). The use of 
 bits results in a maximum time value in the ext4
filesystem of 30 May 2514 at 1:53:03 AM.
Consider the raw content of the reflect.jpg file's inode as seen in Listing
9.17. The access time and the access time (extra) fields are highlighted and
have the values 0x1DE80440 and 0x00000001. A naive approach to time
stamp interpretation would interpret 0x1DE80440 as 25 November 1985
05:31:44 UTC just as seen in the istat output.

The correct approach to this conversion is to consider the two least
significant bits of the access time's extra field. These have the value 
.
This means that the actual time value is 0x11DE80440 which is 1 January
2122 12:00:00 UTC, exactly what was seen in the output from the stat
command.
9.3.2 Ext4 Data Storage
Ext4 provides a number of new means to locate the file content from the
inode. Traditionally all files in ext were located using block pointers (both
direct and indirect) but modern file systems use other methods of content
location. To this end, ext4 introduces a number of new storage mechanisms
which include extent‐based storage, inline storage and symbolic links.
These topics are shown in the remainder of this section.
9.3.2.1 Extent‐Based Storage
Extents are used in many modern file systems as an efficient means of
locating a large number of contiguous blocks (or clusters).5 Consider a file
which consists of 
 contiguous blocks. In ext2 and ext3, block
pointers are used to locate each individual block of the file's data. There is a
one‐to‐one correspondence between the file size and the number of block
pointers that are required for storage. Extent‐based storage records the
starting block number and the number of blocks in the particular extent,

allowing one extent structure to store all information about the file's
location in the case of unfragmented files.
Extents are formed in a tree‐like structure. Each extent block begins with an
extent header. It is then followed by leaf nodes (depth = 0) which contain
extents pointing to the data blocks for the file. In the case of depth greater
than 0, the header is followed by an index block which points to blocks that
contain further nodes in the tree. In the case of small extent trees (i.e. files
with little or no fragmentation) the entire extent tree can be stored in the
inode structure (using the block pointer area in the basic inode). The extent
header itself is 
 bytes in size and its structure is shown in Table 9.10.
Table 9.10 The extent header structure in ext4.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Magic
A magic value identifying an extent header
structure (0xF30A).
0x02
0x02 Num.
Entries
The number of entries following the extent
header.
0x04
0x02 Max.
Entries
The maximum number of entries that might
follow the extent header.
0x06
0x02 Depth
Tree depth. If this value is 0 the extents point to
data blocks. Any value greater than zero means
that the extents are pointing to other extent‐tree
blocks.
0x08
0x04 Generation Tree generation.
Extent leaf nodes contain the actual extents themselves. These are also 
‐byte structures. The leaf node structure is shown in Table 9.11.

Table 9.11 The extent leaf node structure in ext4.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 First
Block
The file's logical block of the first block covered by
this extent. In the case of zero this extent represents
the start of the file content.
0x04
0x02 Num.
Blocks
The number of blocks in the extent. Assuming value
in this field is 
, if 
 then the extent
is initialised and contains 
 blocks. If 
then the extent is uninitialised and contains
 blocks. Due to this the maximum
length of an initialised extent is 32,
 blocks.
0x06
0x02 Start
(Hi)
Upper 
 bits of the starting block number.
0x08
0x04 Start
(Lo)
Lower 
 bits of the starting block number.
Index nodes follow the same structure as shown in Table 9.10. The only
difference is that in an index node the depth will be greater than one. This
means that extents point to other extent‐tree nodes rather than directly to
data blocks.
Listing 9.18 shows inode 
 from Ext4_V1.E01. In this the extent header
is highlighted. The 
‐byte extent appears immediately following the
header. The processed values of these two structures are shown in Table
9.12.

Table 9.12 Processed extent tree from Listing 9.18.
Offset Size Name
Value
Extent Header
0x00
0x02 Magic
0xF30A
0x02
0x02 Num. Entries 0x01 (
)
0x04
0x02 Max. Entries 0x04 (
)
0x06
0x02 Depth
0x00 (
)
0x08
0x04 Generation
0x00 (
)
Extent 1
0x00
0x04 First Block
0x00 (
)
0x04
0x02 Num. Blocks 0xB4 (
)
0x06
0x02 Start (Hi)
0x00 (
)
0x08
0x04 Start (Lo)
0x8084 (
)
Table 9.12 shows the processed header showing that this tree contains a
single entry (of a maximum of four) that will fit in the 
 bytes available
in the inode (
 bytes are reserved for the header, leaving 
 bytes
available for actual extents). The header informs the analyst that the depth
is zero meaning that each of the extents in this tree node point to data
blocks and not to other extent trees. Processing the single extent provides a
starting block of 0x8084 (
) and a length of 0xB4 (
) blocks.
This can be confirmed using istat as shown in Listing 9.19.

In the case of file fragmentation multiple extents will be found in the inode.
In the case of a file with more than four fragments the inode structure is not
sufficiently large to store this information. In this case an extent‐tree
structure is used instead. Due to the nature of extents, each individual extent
is limited to 128MiB in size (assuming the default 
 block size).
Each extent uses 
 bits to represent the number of blocks in the extent.
This leads to a maximum of 
 blocks that can be found in one
single extent. Hence any file larger than this will use multiple extents in
storage.
Listing 9.20 shows an inode from a large (c. 390 MB) file that was created
on an ext4 file system. Examining the inode structure itself shows an extent
header as expected. This header shows that there is one single extent
following this (from a maximum of four possible extents) and that the depth
of this node is 0x01.

The extent that was shown in Listing 9.18 had a depth value of zero. This
meant that it was a leaf node, meaning that it contained extent structures. In
the case of Listing 9.20 the node depth is one. This signifies that this is an
index (also called internal or interior) node. This node does not contain
extents; instead, it contains pointers to other nodes in the tree. Each index
node of an extent tree contains a number of 
‐byte extent index
structures (Table 9.13).
Table 9.13 The ext4 extent index structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Logical
Block
This extent index covers blocks from this point
onwards. A value of zero signifies the start of
the file.
0x04
0x04 Block
Number (lo)
Lower 
 bits of the block number of the
extent node.
0x08
0x02 Block
Number (hi)
Upper 
 bits of the previous field.
0x0A 0x02 Unused
Unused.
Examining the extent index in Listing 9.20 shows that this extent index
refers to the start of the file's content (logical block number is zero). The
physical block number at which the next node is found is 0x3088ED.
Listing 9.21 shows the content of this block.

The extent header is discovered first (magic value 0xF30A as expected).
This informs the analyst that this node contains 
 entries from a
maximum of 0x154 (
). The depth of this node is zero, meaning this
node contains extents. Table 9.14 contains the processed extents.
Table 9.14 Processed extents from Listing 9.21.
Extent
1
2
3
4
Logical Blk 0x00
0x2800
0xA800
0xB000
Num. Blks 0x2800
0x8000
0x8000
0x1800
Start (Hi)
0x00
0x00
0x00
0x00
Start (Lo)
0x152800 0x156000 0x15E000 0x15F800
Extent
5
6
7
8
Logical Blk 0xC800
0x14800
0x15000
0x18000
Num. Blks 0x8000
0x0800
0x3000
0x6A0
Start (Hi)
0x00
0x00
0x00
0x00
Start (Lo)
0x177800 0x17F800 0x18A800 0x190000
The processed extents can then be used to recover the file content in its
entirety. From Table 9.14 the total number of blocks occupied by the file is
0x186A0 (
) which is the correct number of blocks for this file.
Using the extent information each individual extent can be recovered and
the file can then be recreated using the extents.
As files are being created extents are firstly created in the inode as needed.
Initially the first four extents would have been located in the inode
structure. Once a fifth extent is required, the first extent entry is overwritten

in the inode with an extent index and all four existing extents are copied to
the extent index block. However, it would appear from Listing 9.20 that
extents 2–4 are not overwritten. Examining the inode in Listing 9.20 shows
that these three extents are still present; hence, even in the case in which the
extent index block is no longer available it is still be possible to recover
some of the file content.
9.3.2.2 Inline Storage
Another form of storage introduced in ext4 is that of inline storage. In this
storage mechanism small files are stored in the inode itself. This method of
storage is similar to resident $DATA attributes in NTFS. Up to 
 bytes
can be stored using this method (although the use of extended attributes can
increase this value). Note also that the inline storage is not normally
enabled by default in most ext4 file systems. When creating the file system
the option ‐O inline_data must be provided to the mkfs command. If this
option is not provided only extent‐based storage will be utilised.
Inode 
 in Ext4_V1.E01 contains a small text file which is stored inline.
The inline data flag is set in the inode meaning that the data can be read
directly from the inode structure itself. Listing 9.22 shows the output of
istat when run on inode 
 in Ext4_V1.E01. This shows the flag value
and also that there are no direct blocks listed.

Listing 9.23 shows the content of the inode itself. The file size is 0x2E (
) bytes. The flags show that the data is inline and the actual data itself
reads ‘This file will be deleted in a later version. ∖n’.
9.3.2.3 Symbolic Links
Symbolic links are implemented using a feature that is similar to inline
storage (even if inline storage is not enabled on a particular file system). A
symbolic link is a special type of file that points to another file. Listing 9.24
shows the istat output for a symbolic link while Listing 9.25 shows the
actual inode content (inode 
 in Ext4_V1.E01).

From Listing 9.25 the file size is found to be 0x0B (
) bytes. For a
symbolic link this is interpreted not as file size, but as the size of the link
name (i.e. the filename of the file being linked to). The mode value is
0xA1FF. The most significant nibble provides the file type. 0xA000 refers
to a symbolic link. The block pointers (
 bytes at offset 0x28) are then
used to store the data, in this case the file name, which is found to be
reflect.jpg. Hence this inode represents a symbolic link to a file in the same
directory called reflect.jpg.

9.3.3 File Deletion in Ext4
In traditional ext file systems the act of deletion involves setting the deleted
timestamp and overwriting the block pointer structures. Ext4 provides a
number of means of storing files. This section examines each of these
methods of file storage and the forensic implications of deletion with each
method.
We commence with an analysis of inline storage. Listing 9.23 shows an
inode for a file that is utilising inline storage. Listing 9.26 shows the same
inode after deletion.
As with all versions of the ext file system the deletion time value has been
set. However, unlike traditional block pointers the actual data content has
not been overwritten.
Examining symbolic links after deletion shows different behaviour. The
symbolic link in Listing 9.25 is shown again in Listing 9.27 after deletion.
The deletion time is set but in this case the data (the filename) has been
zero'd. This means that this data is unrecoverable.

The final type of storage to examine is that of extent‐based storage
(including extent trees). Listing 9.18 showed a file using a single extent.
Listing 9.28 shows this same file after deletion.
Again the deletion time has been initialised marking the file as deleted. The
extent‐header structure is still present (at least the identifying value 0xF30A
is present), but it would appear that the extent itself has been overwritten.
Hence it is impossible to recover this file using file system forensic
techniques as there is no content location information available after
deletion. The content is still present on the device by default and might be
recoverable using data carving techniques.
What happens in the case of an extent‐tree storage mechanism? Listings
9.20 and 9.21 showed the contents of an inode that required an extent tree
for storage and the content of the extent block itself. Listing 9.29 shows the
same inode after file deletion.

Examining the extent header shows that the number of extents in the
structure has been zero'd. However, it appears that the data is still present.
Interpreting the extent index node (immediately after the header) shows that
the extent block is 0x3088ED (
). The contents of this block,
after deletion, are shown in Listing 9.30.
The extent header is almost fully intact. The only change is that number of
entries has been zero'd. The first extent has also been completely erased but
subsequent extents have some information available. However, the
information remaining is only the logical addresses of file content.
Information about the physical blocks (starting block and number of blocks)
has been overwritten. This means that it is not possible to recover
information from the extent block. However, remember that some
information is still contained in the inode itself. From Listing 9.29 three of
the extents (from a total of 8) are recoverable. This means that when extent
trees are used some of the content is recoverable.
9.3.4 Extended Attributes
Extended attributes (xattr) are extra pieces of data that can be stored in the
metadata structures. They are similar to alternate data streams in NTFS.

These name value pairs can be stored after the inode (space permitting) or
in a separate block on disk. Listing 9.31 shows an inode with an extended
attribute (Inode 
 in Ext4_V2.E01).
When xattr values are stored in the inode itself, the xattr magic value
(0xEA200000) is encountered at offset 0xA0. This is highlighted in Listing
9.31. Immediately following this is found the first xattr. This can be
processed using Table 9.15.

Table 9.15 Extended attribute structure. The values are from Listing 9.31.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x01 Name
Len.
(X)
The length of the attribute name.
0x06 (
)
0x01
0x01 Name
Index
The attribute name index. Possible values
include:
0x01 (
)
0x00: No prefix
0x01: user.
0x02: system.posix_acl_access.
0x03: system.posix_acl_default.
0x04: trusted.
0x06: security.
0x07: system.
0x08: system.richael
0x02
0x02 Value
Offset
Location of attribute value relative to the
start of the extended attribute structure.
0x50 (
)
0x04
0x04 Value
Inum
The inode in which this value is stored.
Zero means it is stored in the same block
as this entry.
0x00 (
)
0x08
0x04 Value
Size
The size of the value in bytes.
0x0C (
)
0x0C 0x04 Hash
Hash of attribute name and value.
0x00 (
)
0x10
X
Name
Attribute name. The length is in the name
length field.
Hidden
Using Table 9.15 it is determined that the attribute name is user.Hidden (the
index value 0x01, implies this is a user attribute with a name Hidden). This
means that the complete name is user.Hidden. The content is located at
offset 0x50 relative to the start of the first extended attribute. This means

that the content occupies 0x0C (
) bytes beginning at offset 0xF4 in the
inode in Listing 9.31. The value of this is Hidden Value.
Multiple xattrs can be stored in a single inode. This is shown in Listing
9.32. The magic value and second attribute along with its corresponding
value are highlighted. Once the space between attributes and values can no
longer fit extra attributes the attributes are stored in a separate block. This is
shown in Listing 9.33.

The File ACL (four bytes at offset 0x68) provides the location of the block
used for further storage of attributes which will no longer fit in the inode's
free space. In Listing 9.33 this block number is 0x84E. Listing 9.34 shows
the content of this block.
The extended attribute block begins with an extended attribute block
header. The structure of this, along with the values from Listing 9.34, is
shown in Table 9.16. The remaining attributes are found after this.

Table 9.16 Extended attribute header block structure. The values are from
Listing 9.34.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x04 Magic
Magic value.
0xEA200000
0x04
0x04 Ref. Count
Reference count.
0x01 (
)
0x08
0x04 Num.
Blocks
The number of blocks used.
0x01 (
)
0x0C 0x04 Hash
Hash value of all attributes.
0x3F583F58
0x10
0x04 Checksum
Checksum of the extended
attribute block.
0x950069DB
0x14
0x0C Reserved
Reserved.
9.3.5 Ext4 Block Group Descriptors
All versions of the ext file system contain block group descriptor structures.
These provide information on the structure of each block group. The block
group descriptor structure is found in all block groups directly after the
superblock (in blocks which contain a superblock) or at the beginning of the
block group. Traditional block group descriptors (ext2 and ext3) contain a
single 
‐byte entry for each block group in the file system. Ext4 requires
more information. In particular ext4 requires 
‐bit addressing, meaning
that ext4 block group descriptor entries require 
 bytes of storage. Table
9.17 shows the structure of the ext block group descriptor structure.

Table 9.17 Ext4 block group descriptor entry structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Block Bitmap (Lo) Block bitmap address – least significant
32‐bits.
0x04
0x04 Inode Bitmap (Lo)
Inode bitmap address – least sig. 32‐bits.
0x08
0x04 Inode Table (Lo)
Inode table address – least sig. 32‐bits.
0x0C 0x02 Free Blocks (Lo)
Free blocks – least sig. 16‐bits.
0x0E
0x02 Free Inodes (Lo)
Free inodes – least significant 16‐bits.
0x10
0x02 Used Directories
(Lo)
Used directories – least sig. 16‐bits.
0x12
0x02 Flags
See description.
0x14
0x04 Exclusion Bitmap
(Lo)
Exclusion bitmap – least sig. 32‐bits.
0x18
0x02 Block BM CSum
(Lo)
Block bitmap checksum – least
significant 16‐bits.
0x1A 0x02 Inode BM CSum
(Lo)
Inode bitmap checksum – least sig. 16‐
bits.
0x1C 0x02 Unused Inodes (Lo) Unused inodes – least significant 16‐bits.
0x1E
0x02 Checksum
Checksum value for the group descriptor
0x20
0x04 Block Bitmap (Hi)
Block bitmap address – most sig. 32‐
bits.
0x24
0x04 Inode Bitmap (Hi)
Inode bitmap address – most sig. 32‐bits.
0x28
0x04 Inode Table (Hi)
Inode table address – most sig. 32‐bits.
0x2C 0x02 Free Block Count
(Hi)
Free blocks – most sig. 16‐bits.
0x2E
0x02 Free Inode Count
(Hi)
Free inodes – most sig. 16‐bits.
0x30
0x02 Used Directories
(Hi)
Used directories – most sig. 16‐bits.
0x32
0x02 Unused Inode (Hi)
Unused inodes – most sig. 16‐bits.

Offset Size Name
Description
0x34
0x04 Exclusion Bitmap
(Hi)
Exclusion bitmap – most sig. 32‐bits.
0x38
0x02 Blk BM CSUM
(Hi)
Block bitmap checksum – most sig. 16‐
bits.
0x3A 0x02 Inode BM CSUM
(Hi)
Inode bitmap checksum – most sig. 16‐
bits.
0x3C 0x04 Reserved
Padding.
The first 0x12 bytes in the ext4 block group descriptor structure are
identical to those in earlier versions of ext. The extra information is added
after this point. This includes some extra count information, checksums and
the location of the snapshot exclusion block (which will exclude certain
files/directories from backups/snapshots in ext4). The main change in the
block group descriptor structure is that addresses are now 
 bytes in size.
This is achieved through a combination of the original four bytes (which
become the least significant bytes) and the extra four bytes (which become
the most significant bytes). The combination of these values provides the
block address in question. The same process is used for counts and
checksums in the block group descriptor entry.
9.3.6 Flexible Block Groups
The traditional block group structure in the ext file system leads to
fragmentation, especially in the case of large files. Large files will occupy
multiple block groups, meaning that both data and metadata are separated.
Multiple non‐contiguous reads are often required to access the contents of
large files. This means that reading a large file can be a slow process and
writing one even slower. Ext4 introduced flexible block groups in order to
address this problem. In this, multiple block groups are chained together as
one logical block group. In order to do this, the bitmaps (data and inode)
and inode tables are gathered together in the first block group. The
remaining block groups are used for data only. Consider a scenario in which
flexible block groups are composed of two traditional block groups. The
effect of this can be seen in Figure 9.3 in which Flexible Block Group
(FBG) 0, contains Block Group (BG) 0 and 1's metadata structures.

Figure 9.3 Flexible block group structure.
This can be seen from the output of Sleuth Kit's fsstat command as seen in
Listing 9.35. On the left is the output from an ext2 file system. This does
not support flexible block groups. On the right the first two block groups in
an ext4 file system using flexible block groups are shown. It is clear that in
the ext4 file system the data bitmap, inode bitmap and inode table for group
1 are actually located in BG0.
From a raw filesystem it is possible to determine if a device supports
flexible block groups. The use of flexible block groups is determined in the
incompatible features value in the superblock. For instance, consider the
superblock in Listing 9.36. The ext4 superblock contains two highlighted
areas. The first represents the incompatible features and has a value of:
0x82C2. Incompatible features are specified as a bitfield and as such
converting to binary is the easiest way to show what features are included.
This is shown in Figure 9.4 where the meaning of each set bit is defined. Bit
9 represents the flexible block group.


Figure 9.4 Incompatible features value 0x82C2 from Listing 9.36 showing
the meaning of each individual bit field value.
Once it is determined that flexible block groups are being used it is then
necessary to determine the size. Examining the single highlighted byte at
offset 0x174 shows a value of 0x04. Raising 2 to the power of this value
provides the number of block groups in each flexible block group. In this
case 
. So there are 
 block groups in each flexible block group.
This can be confirmed using fsstat. Processing the block group descriptors
can proceed as normal. The relevant structures for later block groups in the
flexible block group will appear in the first block group found in the
flexible block group.

9.4 Summary
While the ext2 file system was an excellent file system in its day, by the late
1990s it had begun to show its age. The development of ext3 led to many
performance improvements some of which affected the digital forensic
process. The traditional ext2 directory indexing structure, which merely
used a linear array of directory entries, was unable to scale to large numbers
of files. Hence, ext3 included HTree‐based directory indexing which
resulted in much faster access to files and consequently the ability to
efficiently store large numbers of files in a single directory. The forensic
implications of this were that the HTree structure is processed in a different
manner to that of the linear array.
When compared to other file systems of the time, such as NTFS, ext2
suffered a lack of resilience. This was partially due to the absence of a
journal structure to record changes to the file system prior to write
operations. The journal structure was implemented in ext3, resulting in a
circular journal system which (by default) provides historic metadata. Due
to the nature of deletion in ext filesystems, whereby the block pointers are
overwritten on deletion, the ability to locate older versions of inode
structures allows for the potential recovery of deleted files.
Even with the developments introduced in ext3 this file system was still not
sufficient for modern usage. Hence the file system was further developed to
allow for modern forms of storage. This included inline data for small files
(and symbolic links which are a minor alteration of this concept) and also
the use of extents. This improved file system efficiency in terms of storage
of both small and large files. This change means that forensic analysts
require more knowledge of file storage and also file recovery techniques
based on the four possible storage mechanisms (block pointers, inline data,
extents and symbolic links) encountered in the ext file system family.
The use of block groups in the ext file system resulted in a number of mini
file systems. This meant that some files could be recovered even in the
event of the inode table being destroyed (it was generally only a single part
(i.e. one block group) that was actually damaged). However, for larger files
it led to more fragmentation. Ext4 addressed this through the use of flexible
block groups. In this scenario the metadata information for multiple block
groups is found in one single block group in the flexible block group.

One of the long‐known limitations of the ext family of file systems was the
Y2038 problem, in which signed 
‐bit Unix time would expire in the
year 2038. This has been improved in ext4 in which the basic 
timestamp value is now an unsigned value, and two extra bits from the extra
time fields are used to create an unsigned 
 bit timestamp value. This
will not expire until the year 2514! While fixed for ext users, there is a
potential problem in the forensic community in general, which is what the
tools are actually interpreting! The version of Sleuth Kit used in Listing
9.16 was released in January 2022, more than ten years since the release of
ext4 and still shows an incorrect timestamp. This shows how vital it is that
tools are tested and that their limits are evaluated and understood.
While ext is not considered a ‘standard’ file system for the desktop
computing world (as Linux is not the most popular of operating systems) it
is commonly encountered in the server‐level infrastructure. Many servers in
the world use some form of Linux (and therefor ext) by default. Also when
including the area of mobile phone forensics, it is conceivable that ext is
one of the most common file systems in existence as it is now standard on
Android devices! Hence knowledge of the functioning of the ext file system
is of vital importance to all digital forensic analysts.
Exercises
1. Create an ext4 file system (which supports inline‐data) and add some
content to this file system. The content should include a directory
containing many files (so that HTree indexing will be used), a large
file (to demonstrate extents), a small file (to demonstrate inline
storage) and a symbolic link. Create an image of this device, then
delete all files (and the directory) and create a new image. Using these
two images verify the following claims:
a. The content of files that use inline storage can be recovered after
file deletion.
b. Symbolic link targets (i.e. the filename) are overwritten during
deletion.
c. Extent‐tree blocks can be recovered, but the extents in these
blocks contain insufficient information to recover the file's

content.
d. HTree directory structures are recoverable.
2. Listing 9.37 shows an ext4 inode. In relation to this inode answer the
following questions:
a. What is the creation time of this inode? Your answer should
include the nanosecond component.
b. How is this inode stored (extents or inline)?
c. What is the content of this file?
3. Listing 9.38 shows an inode from an ext4 file system which uses
extent‐based storage. Process this inode and answer the following
questions:
a. Process the mode and determine the file type and file permissions.
b. How is it determined that this file uses extent‐based storage?

c. What is the file size in bytes?
d. How many extents are present in this inode?
e. Determine the starting block and number of blocks in the first
extent in this inode.
Bibliography
Carrier, B. (2005). File System Forensic Analysis. Boston, MA; London:
Addison‐Wesley.
Fairbanks, K.D. (2012). An analysis of Ext4 for digital forensics. Digital
Investigation 1 (9): S118–S130.
Göbel, T. and Baier, H. (2018). Anti‐forensics in Ext4: on secrecy and
usability of timestamp‐based data hiding. Digital Investigation 24:
S111–S120.
Hrishikesh, C.Z. (2017). Addition of Ext4 Extent and Ext3 HTree DIR
Read‐Only Support in NetBSD [Internet]. [cited 2024 March 26].
https://www.netbsd.org/gallery/presentations/hrishikesh/2017_AsiaBSD
Con/abc2017ext4_final_paper.pdf (accessed 14 August 2024).
Mathur, A., Cao, M., Bhattacharya, S. et al. (2007). The new Ext4
filesystem: current status and future plans. Proceedings of the Linux
Symposium (27 Jun 2007), Volume 2, pp. 21–33.
Mingming, C. (2005). Features found in Linux 2.6 [Internet]. [cited 2024
March 26]. http://ext2.sourceforge.net/2005-ols/paper-html/node2.html
(accessed 14 August 2024).
Nordvik, R. (2022). Ext4. In: Mobile Forensics — The File Format
Handbook: Common File Formats and File Systems Used in Mobile
Devices, 41–68. Cham:Springer International Publishing.
Polstra, P. (2015). Linux Forensics: With Python and Shell Scripting.
Createspace Independent Publishing Platform.
Pomeranz, H. (2024). Understanding Ext4 (Parts 1 ‐ 6) [Internet]. [cited
2024 March 26]. https://www.sans.org/blog/understanding-ext4-part-1-

extents/ (accessed 14 August 2024).
SANS Digital Forensics and Incident Response (2017). EXT File System
Recovery ‐ SANS Digital Forensics and Incident Response Summit
2017 [Internet]. YouTube [cited 2024 March 26].
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6pzm6909IvY (accessed 14 August
2024).
The Linux Kernel (2013). ext4 Data Structures and Algorithms — The
Linux Kernel documentation [Internet]. www.kernel.org.
https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/filesystems/ext4/index.html
(accessed 14 August 2024).
Tweedie, S.C. (1998). Journaling the Linux Ext2Fs filesystem. In The
Fourth Annual Linux Expo 1998 May 28.
Wong, D.J. (2013). Disk Layout ‐ Ext4 [Internet].
https://djwong.org/docs/ext4_disk_layout.pdf (accessed 18 December
2024).
Notes
1
https://ext4.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Ext4_Disk_Layout#Descriptor_Bl
ock.
2 HTrees were originally developed for ext2 but were never officially
included in the file system release.
3 The stat command is used only for gathering metadata information about
live files on the currently running file system. It is not a digital forensic
tool and should not be used as a substitute for one.
4 Sleuth Kit version 4.12 was used for this example.
5 NTFS uses extents but refers to them as data runs.
OceanofPDF.com

10
The XFS File System
The XFS file system was created by Silicon Graphics in the mid‐1990s for
their IRIX OS. In 2001 it was ported to Linux and became available on
most Linux distributions soon after this. XFS is a 64‐bit journaling file
system.1 Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) uses XFS as its default file
system since version 7 (approximately 2014).
As with many modern file systems, XFS is based on B+Tree structures. It
uses extents to determine where file content is stored. The combination of
these allows for efficient processing of files, especially larger files. It can
support file systems up to 8 EiB in size and can support files up to the same
size. Theoretically an XFS file system can have up to 
 files. XFS is a
journaling file system in which metadata is routinely journaled. XFS also
uses delayed writing to help ensure consistency of information on‐disk.
XFS uses the concept of allocation groups (AG). These are similar to block
groups in ext, but generally larger in size. Each allocation group acts as its
own file system, managing its own inodes and data blocks. However, files
can span multiple allocation groups. This use of allocation groups allows
for greater parallelism in XFS when compared to other file systems, thereby
exploiting modern multi‐core/processor systems. The use of allocation
groups also allows for striped allocation, creating a form of file system
RAID.
Similar to NTFS, XFS allows for ‘alternate data streams’ allowing
name/value pairs to be stored in addition to the file content. In XFS these
structures are called extended attributes.
Unlike the other file systems discussed in this book, and indeed most file
systems in common usage, XFS stores data in a big‐endian fashion. This
generally means that the interpretation of raw data in the XFS file system is
a little easier than it is in other file systems as there is no need to convert
from little to big‐endian during analysis.

Like many modern file systems journaling is enabled by default in XFS.
XFS provides journaling of metadata structures. Write operations are first
written to the journal structure before being written to the actual disk itself.
This reduces the risk of catastrophic failure in cases where power is lost
during a critical update.
The XFS journal is a circular buffer of disk blocks. The location and size of
the journal is determined from the superblock structure. By default the XFS
journal is stored in the data section of the file system, although it can be
implemented on a separate device. In the case of implementation on a
separate device, the redundancy level is higher. XFS will automatically
rebuild the file system from the journal in the event of a crash.
XFS uses extent‐based data allocation. File contents are referenced by
extent structures which provide a concise method of referencing large
chunks of data. A single extent describes one or more contiguous blocks of
data. In comparison to ext's block pointer method, the extent‐based
allocation requires much less space to describe the location of large files on
disk.
The free space B+Trees are used to manage space allocation on the XFS file
system. They allow space to be located for the allocation of new files. One
of the free space B+Trees is indexed based on the length of the contiguous
blocks that are free, while the other is indexed based on the starting block of
the free space. This method allows fragments of fragmented files to be
stored in close proximity to other extents. Additionally, it also allows the
file system to store a file in an area which has enough contiguous free
blocks to minimise the amount of fragmentation that is required.
In a manner similar to that of NTFS, XFS allows the use of extended
attributes. In this, the user (or the system) can define name/value pairs
associated with an inode. Names are printable character strings of up to
 bytes in length. These names are null‐terminated. The values can
contain up to 64 kB of binary data. Caution must be taken when examining
a file system that contains extended attributes as it may not be possible to
store these extended attributes when a file is recovered. For instance, these
extended attributes cannot be stored on the ext2 file system. Extended
attributes mean that the investigator must be cautious to ensure that all data
in the file system is correctly recovered.

10.1 On‐Disk Structures
There are a number of concepts and on‐disk structures which are of vital
importance if wishing to conduct forensic analysis of XFS file systems.
This section describes some of the key on‐disk structures/concepts
including:
Allocation Groups: In a manner similar to ext, XFS uses mini‐file
systems known as allocation groups, each of which manages its own
storage (both data storage and inodes).
B+Trees: Like most modern file systems the main metadata storage
structure is based on B+Trees.
Superblock: Similar to the superblock structure in ext (and the
volume boot record structures in most Windows‐based file systems)
this structure contains information about the file system as a whole.
Signatures: Each XFS structure has a unique signature making them
easy both to locate and to identify. Corrupt file systems can still be
analysed by searching for these signature values in order to locate
particular structures in the XFS file system.
Time: The time structure used in XFS is that of Unix Time with a
four‐byte nanosecond component.
Addressing: XFS provides two different addressing schemes (absolute
and relative). Knowledge of these is required when wishing to access
particular structures in the file system.
10.1.1 Allocation Groups
The key to the XFS file system is the use of allocation groups (AG). These
can be thought of as mini‐file systems that can be up to 1 TiB in size
(regardless of underlying disk dimensions). Each AG maintains a copy of
the superblock and is responsible for managing its own inodes and free
space. Each AG is truly independent of others (unless a file spans multiple
AGs) and as such each AG is able to operate in parallel, thereby greatly
increasing access efficiency in modern computing systems. Figure 10.1
shows the AG structure.

Figure 10.1 Allocation group structure.
The structures in the AG include:
Superblock: The superblock contains information about the file
system itself. The purpose of this structure in XFS is identical to that
of the superblock in ext (and also the volume boot records in
NTFS/FAT). For instance the XFS superblock will provide the size of
allocation groups, inodes, blocks, sectors, etc. It can also contain

information about the file system UUID and name. Like all file
systems, the superblock is generally the first structure analysed when
performing file system forensics on XFS. The superblock structure is
shown in Section 10.1.4.
Free Block Info: This provides information about the free space
B+Trees. These trees are indexed either by block number (in order to
find free space near to a particular point) or by block count (in order to
find a particular amount of contiguous free blocks to minimise
fragmentation). This structure also provides information about the
overall free space in the AG. The structure of this sector is shown in
Section 10.3.1.
Inode B+Tree Info: Information about the inode B+Tree location and
statistics.
Internal Free List: Information about the free list blocks – these
blocks are maintained for growth of the various AG B+Trees if
required.
Inode B+Tree: B+Trees that contain the inode allocation in the AG.
Free Space B+Tree: Two B+Trees which maintain a list of free blocks
in the AG. One is indexed by the block number at the start of the free
space, and the other is indexed by the length of the free space.
Free List: These blocks are kept free for growth of the Inode B+Tree.
Inodes: Inodes are metadata structures which provide information
about the file and also the location of the file's content.
Directory Entries: As in ext, directory entries are found in directories
and provide the link between the filename and inode number.
10.1.2 Addressing
As stated previously XFS is a 64‐bit file system, and as such, generally uses
64‐bit addressing. However, XFS has two forms of addressing: absolute and
relative. As expected an absolute address is 
 bits in length and
addresses the exact block on disk. A relative address on the other hand is
 bits in size and provides an address of a block relative to the current
AG.

The actual size of addresses depends on file system size. Absolute addresses
are divided into two parts: (1) The allocation group; and (2) the block
address inside that AG. As an example assume the journal address is
0x0000000000008005. This is an absolute address (eight bytes) which
contains two parts, the AG part and the block address part. The sizes of
these parts are dependent on file system size. In order to discover these it is
necessary to find the 
 value in the superblock, which is
located in a single byte at offset 0x7C. This is the number of bits that form
the block address. In the case of a value 0x0E or 
 for 
,
the 
 least significant bits provide the block address while the remaining
bits form the AG address as seen in Figure 10.2.
Figure 10.2 Absolute address structure in XFS where 
 is
.
In this case the hex address value, 0x8005 or 1000 0000 0000 
. The
14 least significant bits are: 00 0000 0000 
 which is 
. The
remaining most significant bits are: 
 which is 
. Hence the journal is
located in AG 2 at block 5. But where is this in the file system? In order to
calculate this the number of blocks in each AG and the size of each block is
required. These values are also located in the superblock. Assuming these
values are 0x4000 and 0x1000, respectively, the absolute byte offset to the
Journal is given by 
.
10.1.2.1 Inode Addressing
Inode addressing is slightly more complex than block addressing as there
are generally multiple inodes in each block. As with block addresses there
are two types of inode address: absolute and relative. Absolute addresses
are eight bytes in length and provide the AG and the position inside the AG.

Relative addresses are four bytes and provide the position relative to the
start of the current AG.
To determine the location of an inode from its XFS inode address the values
of 
 and 
 are required from the
Superblock. Consider the inode address 0x00000060. Based on the length
of this address it is a relative address. Assuming that block size is 0x1000 (
), 
 is 0x10 (
) and that 
is 0x03 (
), the 0x03 least significant bits represent the inode offset in the
block, the next 0x10 (
) bits represent the block location in the AG and
the remaining most significant bits represent the AG itself. This structure is
shown in Figure 10.3.
Figure 10.3 Absolute inode address structure in XFS where 
is 
 and 
 is 
.
In the case of inode 0x80021 (Figure 10.3) it is found to be in AG 1, block
4, offset one. The three least significant bits provide the inode offset in the
block (
), while the next 
 bits provide the block's offset (0b100 =
). The remaining most significant bits show that the inode is found in
AG 1. The actual byte offset to this is shown in Equation 10.1.

(10.1)
Given values of 
 bytes for inode size, and 
 bytes for block
size, the above calculation results in a byte offset of 
.
Extracting 
 bytes at offset 
 in the file system should
result in the inode content itself.
10.1.3 XFS B+ Trees
XFS, like many modern file systems, uses B+Trees for fast, efficient access.
Due to the different forms of addressing (absolute and relative) there are
two forms of B+Tree in XFS. The first is the short form B+Tree which is
used inside a specific group in which addresses are four bytes in length. The
second is the long form B+Tree in which addresses are eight bytes in length
and cover absolute addressing.
Each block in a B+Tree (regardless of whether it is a short‐ or long‐form
tree) is either a leaf node or an internal node. Leaf nodes contain actual
records, while internal nodes contain keys and pointers to other blocks in
the B+Tree. Both of these types have the same abstract format of a header
followed by an array of records.
The short form B+Tree references information contained in the current AG.
Its header structure is defined in Table 10.1. The header for long form
B+Tree nodes is very similar to that found in short form nodes. The key
difference is that addressing is 
 bits rather than 
 bits as these
represent absolute addressing. The structure is given in Table 10.2.

Table 10.1 Structure of the XFS short form B+Tree.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Signature Signature values identifying this particular tree.
0x04
0x02 Level
Level of this block in the tree. 0x00 represents a
leaf node which contains records. Other values
represent internal nodes containing pointers to
other nodes.
0x06
0x02 # Records The number of records in this node.
0x08
0x04 Left
Sibling
AG (relative) block number of the left sibling
node.
0x0C 0x04 Right
Sibling
AG (relative) block number of the right sibling
node.
Version 5
0x10
0x08 Block #
The absolute block number of the block
containing this node.
0x18
0x08 LSN
The log sequence number of the last write to this
block.
0x20
0x10 UUID
UUID of this file system (should match
superblock).
0x30
0x04 Owner
The AG number of the AG containing this tree
block.
0x34
0x04 CRC
Block Checksum.

Table 10.2 Structure of the XFS long form B+Tree.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Signature Signature values identifying this particular tree.
0x04
0x02 Level
Level of this block in the tree. 0x00 represents a
leaf node which contains records. Other values
represent internal nodes containing pointers to
other nodes.
0x06
0x02 # Records The number of records in this node.
0x08
0x08 Left
Sibling
AG (absolute) block number of the left sibling
node.
0x10
0x08 Right
Sibling
AG (absolute) block number of the right sibling
node.
Version 5
0x18
0x08 Block #
The absolute block number of the block
containing this node.
0x20
0x08 LSN
The log sequence number of the last write to this
block.
0x28
0x10 UUID
UUID of this file system (should match
superblock).
0x38
0x04 Owner
The AG number of the AG containing this tree
block.
0x3C 0x04 CRC
Block Checksum.
0x40
0x04 Padding
Padding.
10.1.4 The Superblock
As with many other file systems XFS contains a superblock which
describes the overall structure of the file system. In XFS, every AG contains
a superblock. Generally, only the primary superblock is used (unless a file
system is corrupt and needs to be rebuilt). The primary superblock is found
in the first sector in AG0. Currently the superblock is 
 bytes in size.
Table 10.3 provides the basic structure of the XFS superblock while Table
10.4 provides extra structure information specific to version 5 file systems.

Table 10.3 XFS superblock structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Signature
The magic signature for an XFS superblock
(ASCII: XFSB).
0x04
0x04 Block Size
The size of each block in bytes.
0x08
0x08 # Blocks
The total number of blocks in the file
system.
0x10
0x08 # Blocks in RT
Dev.
The total number of blocks in the real‐time
device.
0x18
0x08 # Extents in RT
Dev.
The number of extents in the real‐time
device.
0x20
0x10 UUID
The UUID for this file system.
0x30
0x08 Journal Block
The first block of the XFS journal.
0x38
0x08 Root Dir Inode
The inode # for the root directory.
0x40
0x08 RT Extents
Bitmap Inode
The inode number for the real‐time extents
bitmap.
0x48
0x08 RT Bitmap
Summary
The inode number for the real‐time
summary.
0x50
0x04 RT Extent Size
The size of the real‐time extent structure in
blocks.
0x54
0x04 AG Size
The size of each AG in blocks.
0x58
0x04 # AGs
The number of AGs in the file system.
0x5C 0x04 # RT Bitmap
Blocks
The number of blocks in the real‐time
bitmap.
0x60
0x04 # Journal
Blocks
The number of blocks in the journal.
0x64
0x02 FS
Version/Flags
The file system version is contained in the
low nibble (and is generally 5 in modern
systems). The remainder contains the file
system flags.
0x66
0x02 Sector Size
The sector size in bytes.

Offset Size Name
Description
0x68
0x02 Inode Size
The size of each inode record in bytes.
0x6A 0x02 Inodes/Block
The number of inodes per block.
0x6C 0x0C FS Name
The file system name.
0x78
0x01
Log to base 2 of the block size.
0x79
0x01
Log to base 2 of the sector size.
0x7A 0x01
Log to base 2 of the inode size.
0x7B 0x01
Log to base 2 of the inodes per block value.
0x7C 0x01
Log to base 2 of the AG size – rounded up
if necessary.
0x7D 0x01
Log to base 2 of the RT extent size.
0x7E
0x01 Being Created
Set if the file system is currently being
created.
0x7F
0x01 Max. Inode %
The maximum percentage of the file system
that can be used for inodes.
0x80
0x08 # Allocated
Inodes
The number of allocated inodes.
0x88
0x08 # Free Inodes
The number of free inodes.
0x90
0x08 # Free Blocks
The number of free blocks.
0x98
0x08 # Free RT
Extents
The number of free RT extents.
0xA0 0x08 User Quota
Inode
User quota information is referenced by this
inode.
0xA8 0x08 Group Quota
Inode
Group quota information is referenced by
this inode.
0xB0 0x02 Quota Flags
Flags related to user/group quotas.
0xB2 0x01 Misc. Flags
Miscellaneous Flags.
0xB3 0x01 Reserved
Zero.
0xB4 0x04 Inode
The inode chunk alignment in blocks.

Offset Size Name
Description
Alignment
0xB8 0x04 RAID Unit
The block size of the underlying RAID
unit.
0xBC 0x04 RAID Stripes
The block size of the underlying RAID
stripes.
0xC0 0x01
Log to base 2 of the directory block
allocation.
0xC1 0x01
Log to base 2 of the sector size for the
journaling device.
0xC2 0x02 Sect. Size Ext
Journal
The sector size of the external journaling
device.
0xC4 0x04 Stripe Size Ext
Journal
The stripe size of the external journaling
device.
0xC8 0x04 Additional
Flags
Extra file system features.
0xCC 0x04 Repeated Flags
Repeated flags for alignment.

Table 10.4 XFS extended superblock structure (version 5).
Offset Size Name
Description
0xD0 0x04 RW Features
Read‐write flags.
0xD4 0x04 RO Features
Read‐only flags.
0xD8 0x04 RW Incompat
Read‐write incompatibility flags.
0xDC 0x04 RW Incompat
Log
Read‐write incompatibility flags for log.
0xE0
0x04 Checksum
CRC32 checksum for the superblock.
0xE4
0x04 Sparse Inode
Align
Sparse inode alignment.
0xE8
0x08 Project Quota
Inode
Project quota inode.
0xF0
0x08 LSN
Log sequence number of last superblock
update.
0xF8
0x10 UUID
UUID if incompat_meta_uuid is set.
0x108 0x08 RM B‐Tree Inode Root for the Real‐Time Reverse Mapping
B‐Tree.
10.1.4.1 Locating Superblocks
As stated earlier the first superblock will appear at sector 0 – it is the first
sector in the first allocation group. Each allocation group maintains a copy
of the superblock (which occurs in the first sector in each allocation group).
The number of allocation groups and the number of blocks in each
allocation group can be determined from Table 10.3. Consider an XFS file
system in which there are four allocation groups, each with 
blocks per group, and a block size of 
 bytes. In this scenario four
superblocks would be expected, one at the start of each allocation
group.This means that every 
 bytes a
superblock is found. Table 10.5 shows the expected locations of superblock
copies in this file system.

Table 10.5 Expected superblock locations in an XFS file system with a
block size of 
 bytes, 
 allocation groups and 
 blocks per
allocation group.
Allocation Group Expected SB Offset (bytes)
0
1
134,217,
2
268,435,
3
402,653,
This method relies on the primary superblock (sector 0) being present and
uncorrupted. But what if this is not the case? All XFS structures contain
signatures, and the superblock is no exception. The superblock signature is
XFSB. Listing 10.1 shows an XFS image being searched for this signature
using the strings/grep commands. The ‐td option to strings provides the
byte offset in the file at which the match is found.
This method may on occasion provide some false positives. For instance if
there was a document in the file system describing XFS signatures, it might
contain the text XFSB. However, these can easily be eliminated as they will
not fit the pattern of the other elements. For instance in Listing 10.1 the
value repeats every 
 bytes. Any hit that does not follow
this pattern is most likely a false positive.
10.1.5 XFS Signatures
The majority of structures in XFS begin with a ‘magic number’ generally an
ASCII string which quickly tells us the structure type. As these signatures
are provided in ASCII (generally) they provide an easy way to quickly

locate particular structures using strings ‐td as seen when locating
superblocks in the previous section. Some of the relevant signatures are
provided in Table 10.6.2
Table 10.6 A selection of signature values used in the XFS file system.
Structure
Magic Number ASCII
Superblock
0x5846 5342
XFSB
AG Free Block Info
0x5841 4746
XAGF
Inode B+Tree Info
0x5841 4749
XAGI
AG Internal Free List
0x5841 464C
XAFL
Log Records (Journal)
0xFEED BABE
Inodes
0x494E
IN
Symbolic Links
0x5853 4C4D
XSLM
Free Space By Block Tree
0x4142 5442
ABTB
Free Space By Block Tree (v5) 0x4142 3342
AB3B
10.1.6 XFS Inodes
As in ext the inode is the structure that contains all the file metadata and
also contains the location of the data content. Figure 10.4 shows the generic
inode structure. There are three main parts to the inode. The inode core
contains the main metadata information. This structure is 
 bytes in
size and is found at the very beginning of the inode. It is followed by the
data fork, which provides the location of the data and finally contains an
optional attribute fork. Table 10.7 provides the structure of the inode core.

Figure 10.4 XFS inode structure.
There are three versions of the XFS inode structure. Generally in modern
XFS file systems (i.e. version 5) only version 3 inodes are encountered.
Versions 1 and 2 are now considered obsolete.

Table 10.7 XFS inode core structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Signature
XFS inode signature (ASCII: IN).
0x02
0x02 Mode
File type and permissions. Similar to ext, the
most significant nibble provides the type while
the remainder provides the permissions.
0x04
0x01 Version
Inode version (1, 2 or 3). XFS version 5 file
systems will always have version 3 inodes.
0x05
0x01 Format
Identifies how information is stored in the data
fork. Known values include: 1 – Resident data
(i.e. the content is present in the inode); 2 – 
Extent array; There are other values but their
meaning is unclear.
0x06
0x02 # Links
(old)
Unused in version 3 inodes.
0x08
0x04 UID
User ID of the inode owner.
0x0C 0x04 GID
Group ID of the inode group.
0x10
0x04 # Links
Number of links to this file.
0x14
0x04 Project ID
Files may be grouped by project ID in XFS
allowing quotas to be set for a particular
project.
0x18
0x06 Padding
Padding bytes.
0x1E
0x02 Flushiter
Flush counter.
0x20
0x04 atime
Last access time.
0x24
0x04 atime (ns)
Nanosecond component of atime.
0x28
0x04 mtime
Last content modification time.
0x2C 0x04 mtime (ns)
Nanosecond component of mtime.
0x30
0x04 ctime
Last metadata change time.
0x34
0x04 ctime (ns)
Nanosecond component of ctime.
0x38
0x08 File Size
For regular files this is the file size, for
directories it is the size of the directory entries,

Offset Size Name
Description
and for symbolic links it is the length of the
link.
0x40
0x08 # Blocks
The number of blocks used to store the inode's
data excluding extended attributes.
0x48
0x04 Extent Size
Extent size hint.
0x4C 0x04 # Extents
The number of extents associated with this file.
0x50
0x02 # ExtAttr
Extents
The number of extents associated with the
extended attributes.
0x52
0x01 Fork Offset
Offset in the inode at which the extended
attribute fork begins. This number must be
multiplied by 
 to get the actual byte offset.
0x53
0x01 Attr. Format Storage format of the attribute fork. This uses
the same values as the data fork format.
0x54
0x04 DMAPI
Event Mask
Related to the Data Management API.
0x58
0x02 DMAPI
State
Related to the Data Management API.
0x5A 0x02 Flags
Flags.
0x5C 0x04 Generation
Generation ID.
0x60
0x04 Next
Unlinked
Tracking of deleted attributes that are still in
use by a program.
0x64
0x04 CRC
Inode checksum.
0x68
0x08 Change
Count
Number of changes to the attributes in this
inode.
0x70
0x08 LSN
Log sequence number of the last write to this
file.
0x78
0x08 Flags2
Further inode flags.
0x80
0x04 COW
Extent Size
Copy‐on‐Write extent size.
0x84
0x0C Padding
Padding.

Offset Size Name
Description
0x90
0x04 btime
Birth (Creation) time.
0x94
0x04 btime (ns)
Nanosecond component of btime.
0x98
0x08 Inode #
Absolute inode number for this inode.
0xA0 0x10 UUID
File system UUID.
10.1.7 Directories
Directories in XFS are composed of a directory header followed by a series
of directory entries. The directory header is either 
 or 
 bytes in size.
This size discrepancy is dependent on the addressing scheme being used. If
 byte (absolute) addressing is used in any of the directory entries then
the structure will be 
 bytes in size; otherwise, the header will be 
bytes in size. The header itself contains the number of entries that require 8
byte addresses. If any entry requires an 8‐byte address then the header will
be 
 bytes. Table 10.8 shows the directory header structure.
Table 10.8 Directory header structure.
Offset Size
Name
Description
0x00
0x01
# Dir.
Entries
The number of directory entries in this
directory.
0x01
0x01
# 
 Byte
Dir.
Entries
The number of directory entries in this
directory that require 8‐byte addressing.
0x02
0x04/0x08 Parent Dir.
Inode
The inode of the directory's parent
directory. This is 0x04 bytes if the previous
field's value is 0x00, and is 0x08 bytes
otherwise.
The structure of the directory entries is shown in Table 10.9. In a manner
similar to that used in ext, the XFS directory entry is used to map the
filename to the inode number. Also the directory entry is the only place in
which a file name is found. The inode itself contains no information about
the file's name.

Table 10.9 XFS directory entry structure.
Offset
Size
Name
Description
0x00
0x01
Name
Length (n)
The size of the file name in bytes.
0x01
0x02
Offset
An offset value used for directory
iteration. This value will affect the order
in which files/directories are displayed.
0x03
(n)
Filename
The filename.
0x03 +
n
0x01
Inode Type The type of the inode (0x01 – regular file;
0x02 – directory).
0x03 +
n + 1
0x04/0x08 Inode #
The inode address. In the case of 
 byte
addresses this is absolute. Four byte
addresses are relative to the current AG.
10.1.8 Extents
Data in XFS can be stored in a number of different ways. Inline (or
resident) data is found directly in the inode's data fork (see Figure 10.4).
Generally inline data storage is used only for small directories. All files,
even ones with very small content, use an extent‐based storage system.
Extents are similar to run‐lists in NTFS (and to extents in ext4). Each extent
records the number of blocks in the extent, the absolute block address of the
starting block in the extent, the logical file block offset represented by the
extent, and a flag which specifies if the extent has been pre‐allocated. The
XFS extent structure is 
 bits (
 bytes) in size. Figure 10.5 shows
the extent structure.
Figure 10.5 XFS extent structure.
The 
 least significant bits represent the number of blocks in the current
extent. Following this the subsequent 
 bits represent the starting block

in the extent. Combining these two pieces of information will allow for the
entire extent to be extracted. In the case of contiguous files this information
will be sufficient to extract the entire file content. However, in the case of
fragmentation there will be multiple extents. In this case, the subsequent
 bits are used to provide the logical block address inside the file. The
first extent will always have a logical block address of 0x00. The single
most significant bit is used as a flag. If set (1), this informs that the extent
has been pre‐allocated (i.e. not written to yet).
A single extent can represent 
 blocks of data. Given that the standard
block size is 
 bytes, this implies that a single extent can represent a
file of up to 
 GiB in size. Anything larger than that requires multiple
extents to represent it. Generally extents are stored in extent list format.
This means that a list of extents is stored in the inode's data fork. In the case
where there are too many extents for this storage method, extents are
instead stored in a long format B+Tree structure. Generally in Version 5
XFS this requires more than 21 extents before a B+Tree is required.
10.1.9 Time in XFS
XFS version 5 records four timestamps in relation to every file/directory.
These are:
mtime: The time at which the file's contents were last modified.
atime: The time at which the file's contents were last accessed.
ctime: The time at which the file's metadata was last changed.
btime: The time at which the file was created (birth time).
Prior to version 5, XFS recorded only MAC times (no creation time was
recorded). In all versions of XFS time is stored as a four‐byte unix time
value, with a four‐byte nanosecond component.
10.2 Analysis of XFS
This section examines the means of analysing the XFS file system. Support
for this file system amongst digital forensic tools is limited. As such the

manual analysis (Section 10.2.3) becomes even more important. Again the
analysis is divided into two sections. Initially basic tasks such as listing files
and recovering file metadata and content are examined. Following this more
advanced topics in file system analysis such as fragmentation, deletion and
journaling are introduced.
10.2.1 Creating XFS File Systems
Generally support for XFS is included in all Linux distributions. If not
present it can be installed by installing xfsprogs. Once installed a file
system is easily created as shown in Listing 10.2. Note the output from
mkfs.xfs provides much information about the file system in question.
Further details of mkfs.xfs can be found on the man page!
10.2.2 Supplied XFS Image Files
The files used in the remainder of this chapter are available from the book's
website. Table 10.10 summarises these files.

Table 10.10 XFS image files used in this chapter.
Filename
Description
XFS_V1.E01 Basic XFS file system with four files and one directory.
XFS_V2.E01 XFS_V1.E01 with two files deleted and an extended
attribute added to a file in the root directory. Hard and soft
links have also been added to this file system.
XFS_V3.E01 XFS_V2.E01 with extra files added which overwrote the
inode information for the deleted files.
XFS_V4.E01 This file system is used for the chapter exercises.
The basic XFS image (XFS_V1.E01) contains four files and one directory.
Two of the files, along with the directory are found in the root directory,
while the remaining two files are found in the subdirectory. The
XFS_V2.E01 image file is created from the first image by deleting the two
files in the subdirectory. In addition to that an extended attribute is added to
a file in the root directory and hard and soft links created. The
XFS_V3.E01 image file is created from XFS_V2.E01 and contains a
number of new files which overwrite the inode information about the
previously deleted files. The final image (XFS_V4.E01) is used in the
chapter exercises.
10.2.3 XFS Manual Analysis
In order to manually analyse an XFS file system there are a number of steps
that must be performed. In this section these steps are described through
example. Throughout this section the file XFS_V1.E01 is the file system
being analysed. This was created using the mkfs.xfs program on a Linux
system.
The process of analysing an XFS file system can be subdivided into six
individual steps. These are:
1. Process the Superblock: As with most file systems the first step is to
process the superblock in order to locate all the relevant file system
structures. In the case of XFS it is necessary to locate the allocation
groups and the structures inside these groups.

2. Locate the Root Directory: Analysis then proceeds to locate the root
directory. The address of this structure is found in the superblock
which is then mapped to a physical on‐disk address.
3. Process the Root Directory: The root directory is processed to reveal
the files/directories in the file system's root.
4. Process the Subdirectories: All subdirectories identified in step 3
(and in this step) are processed. Once all the subdirectories have been
processed every file/directory has been listed.
5. Recover File Metadata: The next step is to recover the metadata
about each file from the XFS inode structure.
6. Recover File Content: The final step in analysis is to recover the file's
content.
10.2.3.1 Process the Superblock
As stated in Section 10.1.4 XFS has multiple copies of the superblock with
one located in the first sector of each allocation group. In version 5 XFS file
systems the superblock is 
 bytes in size. Section 10.1.4 shows how to
locate a superblock based on its signature. In the case of an intact file
system it is easier to merely analyse the primary superblock located in AG
0, which begins in sector 0 on the volume. Listing 10.3 shows the contents
of the superblock in XFS_V1.E01.

In order to proceed with analysis certain information needs to be recovered
from the XFS superblock. This includes:
Block Size: The block is the basic storage structure and as such it is
necessary to know how large this is. This value is given in bytes.
Root Directory Inode: Step 2 involves processing the root directory.
In order to do this the root directory structure must be located. The first
step in this task is to discover the inode for the root directory.
AG Size: Allocation groups are mini file systems inside XFS. These
have their own internal structures. To locate information inside an
allocation group it is necessary to know where the AG starts. Knowing
the size of the AGs will allow the exact starting point of each AG to be
determined.
Sector Size: The sector size is necessary in order to locate other
structures.
Inode Size: Inodes are the basic metadata storage system in XFS. In
order to successfully process these structures it is necessary to know
their size.
Inodes/Block: The number of inodes in each block will allow the
position of a particular inode in the inode table to be determined.

: The log of the AG Size is used in determining the
absolute address of both blocks and inodes (Figures 10.2 and 10.3).
: The log of the inodes per block value is
used to determine the absolute inode address in the file system.
UUID: The UUID is necessary to ensure that all subsequent structures
belong to the same file system.
Table 10.11 shows the extracted values from XFS_V1.E01. It is left as an
exercise for the reader to complete the remainder of the analysis of the
superblock (Tables 10.3 and 10.4).
Table 10.11 Extracted values from the superblock in XFS_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x04
0x04 Block Size
0x1000 (
)
0x20
0x10 UUID
0xF7A7 … BBFE
0x38
0x08 Root Dir. Inode
0x80 (
)
0x54
0x04 AG Size
0x8000 (
)
0x58
0x04 # AGs
0x04 (
)
0x66
0x02 Sector Size
0x200 (
)
0x68
0x02 Inode Size
0x200 (
)
0x6A 0x02 Inodes/Block
0x08 (
)
0x7B 0x01
0x03 (
)
0x7C 0x01
0x0F (
)
10.2.3.2 Locate the Root Directory
After gathering information about the file system as a whole, analysis
proceeds with the listing of files. This process commences by listing the
contents of the root directory. However, in order to process the root
directory the root directory structure must first be located. From step 1 the
required information has already been obtained (see Table 10.11) which
includes:

Inode Address: 0x0000 0000 0000 0080
: 0x0F (
)
: 0x03 (
)
Block Size: 0x1000 (
)
AG Size: 0x8000 (
)
Inode Size: 0x200 (
)
The root directory inode address is an 
‐byte value. This implies that this
is an absolute inode address. In order to process this value, it is necessary to
also have the 
 and 
 values also.
These are 
 and 
, respectively. The method of processing these
values is provided in Section 10.1.2. The 
 least
significant bits represent the inode offset inside the block. The next
 bits represent the block offset inside the allocation group,
and the remaining bits represent the allocation group itself. The processing
of the root directory's inode address is shown in Listing 10.4.
The result of this step shows that the root directory is located at inode offset
 in block offset 
 in allocation group 
. Calculating the
actual byte offset to this location is done using:
giving a byte offset of 
 bytes. In the next step the root directory
inode is extracted and processed.

10.2.3.3 Process the Root Directory
The contents of the root directory inode are shown in Listing 10.5. The
inode is 
 bytes in size; however, the output in Listing 10.5 has been
truncated as not all of the content is in use. From Section 10.1.6 the
structure of the inode is known. Each inode consists of up to three parts, a
required inode core and optional data and attribute forks. The inode core is
 bytes in size and is highlighted in Listing 10.5.
Table 10.12 shows the partially processed inode core structure in Listing
10.5. Only those values that are necessary for further analysis or of possible
interest in investigation are shown. It is left as an exercise for the reader to
process the remainder of the inode core Structure using Table 10.7.

Table 10.12 Partially processed root directory inode in XFS_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x02 Signature
IN
0x02
0x02 Mode
0x41ED
Directory rwxr‐xr‐x
0x05
0x01 Format
0x01 – resident
0x10
0x04 # Links
0x03 (
)
0x20
0x04 atime
0x6548BD3F
2023‐11‐06 10:17:35 UTC
0x24
0x04 atime (ns) 0x312C8B8F (
)
0x28
0x04 mtime
0x6548BD32
2023‐11‐06 10:17:22 UTC
0x2C 0x04 mtime (ns) 0x3220B0E7 (
)
0x30
0x04 ctime
0x6548BD32
2023‐11‐06 10:17:22 UTC
0x34
0x04 ctime (ns) 0x3220B0E7 (
)
0x38
0x08 File Size
0x36 (
)
0x90
0x04 btime
0x6548B9D3
2023‐11‐06 10:02:59 UTC
0x94
0x04 btime (ns) 0x1FD3B868 (
)
0x98
0x08 Inode #
0x80 (
)
0xA0 0x10 UUID
0xF7A7 … BBFE
Processing the root directory inode shows that this inode represents a
directory (as expected) with permissions rwxr‐xr‐x. The data fork in this
directory is resident meaning that the actual data is stored in the inode
structure itself. Examining Listing 10.5 shows what appear to be file names
in the data fork (immediately after the inode core) so this is also an
unsurprising result. The time values are converted as normal unix time
values. The file size is given as 0x36 bytes. As the data fork is resident

these 0x36 bytes will appear immediately after the inode core structure.
This data is shown in Listing 10.6. Alternate directory entries are
highlighted.
Processing the directory header in Listing 10.6 shows that there are three
directory entries present, none of which require 8‐byte addressing. This
results in the header structure being a mere 
 bytes in size. The parent
directory inode is given as 0x00000080 – in other words the root directory
itself! Directory entries are processed based on Table 10.9. The results of
this are shown in Table 10.13.
Table 10.13 Processed directory entries in the root directory.
Name
Entry 1
Entry 2
Entry 3
Name Length (n) 0x05 (
)
0x08 (
)
0x0B (
)
Offset
0x60 (
)
0x78 (
) 0x90 (
)
Filename
Files
info.txt
sunrise.jpg
Inode Type
0x02
0x01
0x01
Directory
File
File
Inode #
0x83 (
) 0x85 (
) 0x86 (
)
Processing the root directory results in two files (info.txt and sunrise.jpg)
and one directory (Files). The file inode values are 0x85 and 0x86,
respectively, while the directory's inode is 0x83.
10.2.3.4 Process the Subdirectories
Processing of subdirectories is identical to the method of processing the
root directory. The inode structure is located (0x83 for the Files directory)
and processed using the same method as in the previous step. This allows
the listing of all files/directories in the subdirectory. Once all directories in

the file system have been processed the analyst can be confident that all live
files have been listed. The processing of the Files subdirectory in
XFS_V1.E01 is left as an exercise for the reader.
10.2.3.5 Recover File Content/Metadata
The final step in analysing an XFS file system is to recover file metadata
and content. Metadata is recovered from the inode core, in exactly the same
manner that was used when analysing the root directory. One scenario in
file recovery has already been demonstrated, that of resident data recovery.
In this scenario the data fork contains the actual file content. The file size
can be read from the inode core, and the data extracted. However, resident
data cannot be used if the file content would exceed the size of the inode.
Consider the file sunrise.jpg (Inode 0x86) on the XFS_V1.E01 disk image.
This is a large file, too large to be stored as resident data. Hence another
method must be used. Large files in XFS are generally stored using extents.
Listing 10.7 shows the contents of the inode core for Inode 0x86. The data
fork format is given as 0x02 meaning that extent‐based storage is being
used. The file size is 0x83EF8 (
) bytes. The file content is stored
in one single extent.
Extents in XFS are 
‐byte structures. Extents are found in the data fork,
meaning that they are found immediately after the inode core. In the case of
inode 0x86 there is only one single extent. This extent is shown in Listing
10.8.

Processing this allows the discovery that no flag value is set, the logical
position in the file is 
, meaning that this is the first extent of the file's
content – which is always the case when there is only a single extent. The
absolute block number at which the extent starts is 
 and the number of
blocks in the extent is 
. This file can then be extracted using the
command shown in Listing 10.9. Figure 10.6 shows the recovered picture.

Figure 10.6 Contents of the recovered file sunrise.jpg.
This section has shown how to perform basic manual analysis of an XFS
file system. However, XFS is a modern file system providing many features
that have not been covered to this point. In the next section some of these
advanced features are examined.
10.3 XFS Advanced Analysis
To this point the basic structures in XFS have been described and basic
manual analysis has been performed. Manual analysis is more important in
XFS than in many other file systems as forensic tools do not often provide
support for this file system. At this stage the reader should be able to
describe the layout of an XFS file system using the superblock; process the
root directory and subsequent directories to list the files in the file system;
and process inodes to recover file metadata and content.
In this section the focus turns toward more advanced topics in the XFS file
system. This begins with block and inode management and then turns to file

deletion and extended attributes. Finally this section concludes by
examining the XFS journaling structure.
10.3.1 AG Free Space Management
Directly after the superblock sector the free block information area is found
(i.e. byte offset 
). This provides information about the free space
B+Trees and general information about the free space in the particular
allocation group. The free space system is relevant to the particular AG in
which it is found. There are two versions of the free space tree, one of
which is indexed based on the block number and the other is indexed based
on the count of empty blocks. The first method allows free space near a
particular point to be located, while the second allows an area large enough
for a particular file to be located in order to minimise fragmentation. Listing
10.10 shows the free block information area from XFS_V1.E01. Table
10.14 shows the processed values from Listing 10.10.

Table 10.14 Partially processed AG free block information structure. The
values are from Listing 10.10.
Offset Size
Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x04
Signature
Magic number for XFS free block
information area.
XAGF
0x04
0x04
Version #
The version number (currently 1). 0x01 (
)
0x08
0x04
AG #
The AG number to which this
AGF belongs.
0x00 (
)
0x0C 0x04
AG Size
(Blocks)
The size of the AG in blocks – 
generally identical to that found
in the superblock. May differ for
the final AG.
0x8000 (
)
0x10
3*4
bytes
Roots
Three relative block numbers,
two for the free space B+Tree
locations and one for the reverse
mapping B+Tree if enabled.
0x01 (
);
0x02 (
);
0x00 (
)
0x1C 3*4
bytes
Levels
Specifies the depth of the above
trees (two for free space trees and
one for reverse mapping B+Tree).
0x01 (
);
0x01 (
);
0x00 (
)
0x28
0x04
First Free
List Blk
Index of the first free list block.
0x01 (
)
0x2C 0x04
Last Free
List Blk
Index of the last free list block.
0x04 (
)
0x30
0x04
# Blks in
Free List
Number of blocks in the free list. 0x04 (
)
0x34
0x04
# Free
Blks in AG
Number of free blocks in the AG. 0x7E71 (
)
0x38
0x04
# Blks
Long Free
Number of blocks in the longest
contiguous segment of free
blocks.
0x7E6D (
)

Offset Size
Name
Description
Value
0x3C 0x04
# Blks
FSBT
Number of blocks used for free
space B+Trees. Only used if
certain features are enabled.
0x00 (
)
0x40
0x10
UUID
This UUID should be the same as
that found in the superblock.
0xF7A7 …
BBFE
0x68
0x08
LSN
Last write log sequence number.
0x00 (
)
There are two B+Trees related to free space. Each of these trees addresses
items inside the individual AG and as such they use the short form header.
The records for these trees are a combination of offset/count pairs. The
offset is to a relative block address and the count measures the number of
blocks that are free from that point.
Both of the trees contain the exact same information but are sorted on
different items. The first B+Tree is sorted based on the starting block
number, while the second is sorted on the count of the number of blocks
that are free. The roots of these trees are discovered from the AG free list
information sector above. In this case, the free space by block number tree
is located at block 0x01 and the free space by count tree is located at block
0x02. Listing 10.11 shows the free space by block number tree.
This structure is processed using the short form B+Tree header in Table
10.1. The results of this are shown in Table 10.15. Following the header
there are two entries in this B+Tree. Each entry consists of an offset (4 byte
block number) and a count of free blocks (four bytes). The two records are
highlighted in Listing 10.11. The result of processing these is shown in
Table 10.16.

Table 10.15 Processed short form tree header from the free space block
number B+Tree in AG0 of XFS_V1.E01 (Listing 10.11).
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x04 Signature
AB3B
0x04
0x02 Level
0x00 (
)
0x06
0x02 # Records
0x02 (
)
0x08
0x04 Left Sibling
0xFFFFFFFF
0x0C 0x04 Right Sibling 0xFFFFFFFF
Version 5
0x10
0x08 Block #
0x08 (
)
0x18
0x08 LSN
0x010000001A
0x20
0x10 UUID
0xF7A7…BBFE
0x30
0x04 Owner
0x00 (
)
0x34
0x04 CRC
0x5A9A764A
Table 10.16 Processed entries in Listing 10.11.
Record 1
Record 2
Offset 0x0C (
) 0x193 (
)
Count 0x04 (
)
0x7E6D (
)
The first entry in Table 10.16 can be interpreted as four free blocks
beginning at block 0x0C (
), meaning that blocks 
, 
, 
 and
 are free. The second B+Tree (free space by length) will have the same
records, but they will be sorted based on the count of the blocks rather than
the starting block number. These structures are used to determine what free
blocks are available for new files in the file system.
10.3.1.1 AG Free List
The allocation group free list is found in sector 3 in the allocation group.
The signature for this is 0x5841464C (ASCII: XAFL). This structure
contains a header, which is followed by an array of relative block addresses

(four bytes each). These blocks are reserved for further free space B+Tree
growth. The AG free list from AG 0 in XFS_V1.E01 is shown in Listing
10.12. The header is 
 bytes in size and is highlighted in Listing 10.12.
Table 10.17 provides the structure of the AFL header along with the values
from Listing 10.12.
Table 10.17 AG Free list header structure with values from Listing 10.12.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x04 Signature Magic number for the AG Free
List.
XAFL
0x04
0x04 AG #
Specifies the AG # containing this
list.
0x00 (
)
0x08
0x10 UUID
File System UUID
0xF7A7…
BBFE
0x18
0x08 LSN
Log Sequence Number for the last
write to this block
0x00 (
)
0x20
0x04 CRC
Checksum for this sector
0x1CE41527
The remainder of the free list structure is composed of four byte block
numbers (0xFFFFFFFF (
) is a NULL value); however, not all of these
entries are active. To determine this refer back to the AG free block
information area (Table 10.14) which refers to the first and last free list
blocks (0x01 and 0x04, respectively). These are array index positions in the
free list (note that the indexing begins at 0x00). The first free list block is
index 0x01 (the second element in the list). The final free list index is 0x04.
This means that the elements in positions 
–
 are being used. The
values of these are 0x06, 0x07, 0x08 and 0x09, respectively. Hence these
are the four blocks in AG0 of XFS_V1.E01 that are being reserved for
further growth of the free space trees.

10.3.2 AG Inode Management
Allocation group inodes are managed in a similar fashion to blocks. There
is an AG inode information structure located in sector 2 of the allocation
group (Signature XAGI). This structure provides information on the
location of the inode B+Tree(s). Records in the inode B+Tree provide
information relating to the allocation status of each inode in the file system.
Note that inodes are allocated in XFS only when they are needed; hence,
newer file systems (or file systems that very rarely change) will have only a
limited number of inodes. Traditionally only a single inode tree is used
which tracks the used inodes. However, certain systems allow for a second
inode tree which tracks free inodes. This speeds
file system performance when creating new inodes. Listing 10.13 shows the
contents of the inode information structure in AG0 of XFS_V1.E01. The
inode information structure along with the processed values in Listing 10.13
are shown in Table 10.18.

Table 10.18 The inode information area. Values are from Listing 10.13.
Offset Size
Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x04
Signature
Magic number identifying the
structure.
XAGI
0x04
0x04
Version
Currently set to 1.
0x01 (
)
0x08
0x04
AG #
AG number containing this
structure.
0x00 (
)
0x0C
0x04
AG Size
Size of the AG in blocks.
0x8000 (
)
0x10
0x04
Inode
Count
Number of allocated inodes in
this block.
0x40 (
)
0x14
0x04
IBT Root
The block number of the inode
B+Tree root node.
0x03 (
)
0x18
0x04
IBT Level The number of levels in the
inode B+Tree.
0x01 (
)
0x1C
0x04
Free
Inodes
The number of free inodes in
this AG.
0x38 (
)
0x20
0x04
New
Inode
Relative inode number of the
most recently allocated chunk
of inodes.
0x80 (
)
0x24
0x04
Dir Inode
Always 0xFFFFFFFF.
0xFFFFFFFF
0x28
0x04
x
Unlinked
Inodes
A list of relative inode
addresses representing inodes
that have been deleted but are
still referenced.
All NULL
Version 5
0x128 0x10
UUID
File system UUID.
0xF7A7 …
BBFE
0x138 0x04
CRC
Sector checksum.
0x031001EE
0x13C 0x04
Padding
Padding.
0x00 (
)

Offset Size
Name
Description
Value
0x140 0x08
LSN
Log sequence number of last
write to this sector.
0x0100000014
0x148 0x04
FIBT Root Block number of the free inode
B+Tree.
0x04 (
)
0x14C 0x04
FIBT
Level
Number of levels in the free
inode B+Tree.
0x01 (
)
From Table 10.18 it is clear that there are two inode trees in this file system.
The root node of the inode B+Tree is located in Block 3, while the root
node of the free inode B+Tree is located in Block 4. Listing 10.14 shows
the contents of the inode B+Tree (Block 3) in XFS_V1.E01. This tree uses
the short form header which is processed in Table 10.19.

Table 10.19 Processed inode B+Tree. from AG0 in XFS_V1.E01. Values
are from Listing 10.14.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x04 Signature
IAB3
0x04
0x02 Level
0x00 (
)
0x06
0x02 # Records
0x01 (
)
0x08
0x04 Left Sibling
0x0C 0x04 Right Sibling
Version 5
0x10
0x08 Block #
0x18 (
)
0x18
0x08 LSN
0x100000014
0x20
0x10 UUID
0xF7A7…BBFE
0x30
0x04 AG #
0x00 (
)
0x34
0x04 Checksum
0xE3F6856B
Table 10.19 shows that this tree contains a single record. In the case of
inode trees each record is 
 bytes in size. In the simplest case these
records consist of three fields. The first four bytes represent the starting
inode in the allocation chunk, the next four bytes represent the number of
inodes in the allocation chunk and the final 
 bytes represent the
allocation bitmap itself. However, in file systems in which the sparse inodes
flag is set the number of inodes in the chunk is removed and replaced with a
more complex structure. This structure is shown in Table 10.20. The values
are taken from the record in Listing 10.14.

Table 10.20 Inode B+Tree record structure. Processed values are from the
record in Listing 10.14.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x04 First
Inode
The first inode in the allocation
chunk.
0x80 (
)
0x04
0x02 Hole
Bitmask
A 16‐bit element showing which
parts of the chunk are not allocated
to inodes. Each bit represents four
inodes.
0x0000
0x06
0x01 Num.
Inodes
The number of inodes in the
allocation chunk.
0x40 (
)
0x07
0x01 Num. Free
Inodes
The number of free inodes in the
allocation chunk.
0x38 (
)
0x08
0x08 Bitmap
A bitmap structure of allocated
inodes.
0xFFFF…
FF00
From Table 10.20 there is only a single chunk of allocated inodes. This
chunk begins at inode 0x80 (
) and contains 0x40 (
) inodes, 0x38
(
) of which are free. The remaining 
 bytes contain the allocation
bitmap for these 
 inodes. To interpret the bitmap, it is first converted to
binary (only the least significant bytes 0xFF00 are converted below) giving:
The least significant bit represents the first inode in the allocation chunk,
while the most significant bit represents the final inode in the chunk. A
value of 0 means that the inode is in use, while a value of 1 means that the
inode is free. Hence in the supplied XFS_V1.E01 file system's AG 0 the
 inodes, beginning at inode 0x80 (
) are occupied and the
remainder are free.
10.3.3 Deleted Files
The file system XFS_V2.E01 was created from XFS_V1.E01 by deleting
two files from the original file system. These files were delete.txt (Inode:

0x84) and tree.jpg (Inode: 0x87), both in the Files directory. The delete.txt
file's extent contained a single block at block 
, while tree.jpg
contained 
 blocks at block number 
. Listing 10.15 shows the
content in both locations is still present. However, the question that must
now be answered is whether these files can be recovered using file system
structures, or is it only through carving that file recovery can be achieved?
When manual analysis is performed, it is discovered that the directory
entries still exist in this case. Listing 10.16 shows the contents of the
directory entries for the Files directory. The number of entries is now zero
because all files in the directory were removed but the old directory entries
still exist in slack space.
The final step is to check the status of the inodes for these files. Inodes
0x84 and 0x87 represent the deleted files. These inodes are located at byte
offsets 
 and 
, respectively. Listing 10.17 shows the
content of inode 0x87 after deletion, clearly showing that the file extent is
still intact.

This section shows that not only does the file content remain, the metadata
(i.e. inode content) also remains. However, if only delete.jpg had been
deleted from the Files directory, the directory entries would have been
restructured. This means the entry for tree.jpg would have been moved to
the start of the directory, thereby overwriting the entry for delete.txt.
Hence, it is only entries that remain in the directory's slack space that can be
recovered using this method. The fact that the inode as well as the data are
intact means that metadata carving techniques from the very simple such as
searching for IN, the Inode signature, to the more complex such as Nordvik
et al.'s generic metadata time carving, can be used in addition to traditional
content‐based carving approaches. The reader should however be aware that
the inodes and/or blocks occupied by the deleted files are now marked as
unallocated and may be overwritten at any stage. The recovery of delete.txt
through the examination of Inode 0x84 is left as an exercise for the reader.
10.3.4 Extended Attributes
The XFS file system allows for extended attributes, similar to alternate data
streams in NTFS. These extended attributes consist of name value pairs.
Names are generally ASCII (or other printable) characters while the value
can consist of up to 64Kb binary data. The XFS_V2.E01 file system
contains a file called sunrise.jpg (Inode: 0x86) to which an extended
attribute was added. The attr command is used to manage extended
attributes on the XFS file system. In this case the attribute was added using
the command attr ‐s “Hidden” ‐V “Hidden Information” sunrise.jpg, to
create an attribute called Hidden with the value “Hidden Information”.

Extended attributes are stored in the attribute fork area of the inode (Figure
10.4). The location of this structure is different in each inode and is pointed
to from the inode core. At offset 0x52 the location of the start of the
attribute fork is found. This value is multiplied by 8 to get the byte offset to
the start of the attribute fork relative to the end of the inode core (
bytes). The following byte, offset 0x53, provides the storage format for the
attribute fork, which uses the same values as the data format byte. Listing
10.18 shows the inode for sunrise.jpg (Inode: 0x86) in XFS_V2.dd. In this
case the offset is 0x25, and the storage format is 0x01, meaning that the
data is resident. The byte offset to this attribute is given as
The attribute area contains a small header which provides in the first two
bytes (0x1F) the length of the extended attribute fork, the number of
attributes in the next byte (0x01) and is finalised with a single alignment
byte (always 0x00). The extended attributes follow this header structure.
Table 10.21 provides the extended attribute structure and values from the
attribute shown in Listing 10.18.

Table 10.21 Extended attribute structures. Values are from Listing 10.18.
Offset
Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x01 Name Length
(n)
Length of the attribute
name
0x06 (
)
0x01
0x01 Value Length
(m)
Length of the attribute
value
0x12 (
)
0x02
0x01 Flags
Flags
0x00 (
)
0x03
n
Name
Attribute name
Hidden
0x03 +
n
m
Value
Attribute value
Hidden
Information
10.3.5 Links
As with many file systems XFS supports the creation of links. Both hard
and soft links can be created. In XFS_V2.E01 both a hard and soft link
were created in the root directory to the sunrise.jpg file. Listing 10.19
shows the contents of the root directory's data fork after the creation of
these links. Notice that in the case of the hardlink,jpg file, the inode
number for this is 0x86, identical to that of the target file, sunrise.jpg.
The content of inode (0x86) is shown in Listing 10.20. In this, the number
of links has been increased, showing that a hardlink has been created to this
file. This inode is now associated with two separate directory entries. The
inode will not be deleted until both of these are removed. Deleting either
the hardlink.jpg or sunrise.jpg will result in the link count being
decreased. The inode will not be deallocated until the link count reaches 
.

What about a symbolic, or soft link? Inode 0x88 in Listing 10.19 is an
example of a softlink. The contents of this inode are provided in Listing
10.21. Firstly it is possible to tell that this is a softlink through the
mode/permissions value. This is 0xA1FF, in which the most significant
nibble, 0xA, represents a symbolic link structure.
The link itself is discovered by firstly determining the storage mechanism,
which in this case is 0x01, meaning that the data is resident in this inode.
The data is 0x0B bytes in size. Consulting the data area shows that the
symbolic link is sunrise.jpg. In the case that the symbolic link text is
greater than the available data area, symbolic links can be stored using
extents. In this case, the link text will be located elsewhere in the file
system and the inode's data fork will contain an extent which points to this
location.

10.3.6 The XFS Journal
XFS provides a journaling system for use with the file system. The journal
structure is a set of contiguous blocks, the location of which is discovered
in the XFS superblock. The XFS journal can exist on the same device as the
file system or, for added redundancy and efficiency, it can also exist on a
separate device. Listing 10.22 shows the contents of the superblock in
XFS_V3.E01 with the journal start block and the number of blocks in the
journal highlighted. This information allows the journal to be extracted
from the file system. For instance in Listing 10.22 the journal start block is
0x10006 and there are 0x558 blocks in the journal. As the block size is
0x1000 bytes the following command is used to extract the journal:
dd if=mnt/ewf1 of=journal.raw bs=$((0x1000)) skip=$((0x10006))
count=$((0x558)).
The journal consists of a series of log records which contain a transaction,
or part of a transaction. Transactions comprised log operation headers and
raw data. The start operation in a transaction describes the transaction ID
while the final operation is a commit record. The XFS journal records
changes to metadata structures made by the transaction. These changes are
found between the start and commit operations.
Previously inode 0x87 (tree.jpg) was deleted. In this version of the file
system, new files have been created which have overwritten inode 0x87.
This section attempts to use the journal to recover the original metadata
structure for inode 0x87 and from that to recover the contents of the deleted
file. Linux provides some tools to work directly with XFS logs. Listing
10.23 shows an excerpt from the output of xfs_logprint for XFS_V3.E01.3

The log sequence number (LSN) provides the cycle number (
) and the
sector in the journal in which this transaction is found (
). The first
operation shown here is a transaction start operation. Three further
operations are shown. Operation 
 shows that inode 0x87 is being
updated. The following two operations show information about the inode
core structure (operation 
) and the inode's data fork being updated
(operation 
). It is in these operations that it may be possible to
determine the old values for inode 0x87.
Each transaction begins with a journal log record header structure, an
excerpt from which is shown in Listing 10.24 with the structure and
interpreted values provided in Table 10.22. This log record header is found
at sector 
 in the recovered journal file and represents the transaction
shown in Listing 10.23. The journal log record header occupies an entire
sector (
 bytes).


Table 10.22 Processed values from the log record header in Listing 10.24.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x04 Signature Journal signature
0xFEEDBABE.
0xFEEDBABE
0x04
0x04 Cycle
Cycle number of the log record.
0x01 (
)
0x08
0x04 Version
Log record version (currently 2). 0x02 (
)
0x0C
0x04 Length
Log record length in bytes.
0x400 (
)
0x10
0x08 LSN
Log sequence number of this
record.
0x10000001A
0x18
0x08 Tail LSN Log sequence number of the first
record with uncommitted buffers.
0x100000014
0x20
0x04 CRC
Checksum.
0x2C1FA8DB
0x24
0x04 Prev.
Block
Block number of the previous
log record.
0x14 (
)
0x28
0x04 # Log
Ops.
The number of log operations in
this record.
0x0C (
)
0x2C
0x04 Cycle
Data
This array consists of 
 four
byte entries which represent a
particular transaction number.
0x0C3BA9E3
0x12C 0x04 Format
Format of the log record. This is
one of:
0x01 (
)
0x00: Unknown;
0x01: Linux LE;
0x02: Linux BE;
0x03 Irix BE.
0x130 0x10 UUID
File system UUID.
0xF7A7…
BBFE
0x140 0x04 Size
Log record size.
0x8000 (
)

Log record header structures can be located simply by searching for their
magic signature 0xfeedbabe. This is shown in Listing 10.25 for
XFS_V3.E01. Each of the 
 hits discovered in this file represents a
transaction.
Immediately after the journal log record header a series of log operations
are located. These consist of a header and, in some cases, data associated
with the particular operation. These describe the individual operations that
are occurring. Operations such as transaction start and commit have only a
header as there is no data associated with them. Table 10.23 provides the
structure for a log operation header.

Table 10.23 Journal log operation header structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 TID
The transaction ID for this transaction. Note that
this may be the actual TID or a pointer to the index
position in the cycle array in the log record header.
0x04
0x04 Length
Length of the data region following this operation
header.
0x08
0x01 Client
ID
The instigator of this transaction. Possible values
include:
0x69: XFS_TRANSACTION;
0x02: XFS_VOLUME;
0xAA: XFS_LOG.
0x09
0x01 Flags
Transaction‐specific flags. Possible values include:
0x01: Transaction start;
0x02: Transaction commit;
0x04: Continue to new record;
0x08: Started in prev. record;
0x10: End of continued transaction;
0x20: Unmount transaction.
0x0A 0x02 Padding 0x0000
Listing 10.26 shows the first three log operation headers in sector 
 of
the recovered journal file from XFS_V3.E01. Alternate operation headers
are highlighted. Unhighlighted information represents the data associated
with the previous log operation header. From this the first operation
contains no data, while operations 
 and 
 contain some data. Table
10.24 processes the three operation headers.

Table 10.24 Processed operation headers from Listing 10.26.
Off.
Len. Name
Op 0
Op 1
Op 2
0x00 0x04 TID
0x01
0x0C3BA9E3 0x0C3BA9E3
0x0C3BA9E3
0x04 0x04 Length 0x00 (
)
0x10 (
)
0x18 (
)
0x08 0x01 CID
0x69 (
) 0x69 (
) 0x69 (
)
0x09 0x01 Flags
0x01 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
START
0x0A 0x02 Padding 0x00
0x00
0x00
Operation 
 marks the start of the transaction with ID 0x0C3BA9E3. The
transaction ID (TID) value in this operation header is 0x01. This is not the
TID itself, but a pointer to the position in the cycle array in the log record
header (Listing 10.24). The flag value informs the analyst that this is a
START operation. As this is a start operation it contains no data.
Operation 
 consists of 0x10 bytes of data. From processing the log
record header, it is determined that the journal data is stored in a little‐
endian format. The first four bytes represent the magic value TRAN.
Generally it is necessary to process the first part of the data to determine the
type of operation that is represented. Data items that begin with the TRAN
signature are called transaction headers. The structure of these, with values
from Listing 10.26, is given in Table 10.25. Remember that all data is
stored in a little‐endian format!

Table 10.25 Processed transaction header from Listing 10.26.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x04 Magic
Signature value.
TRAN
0x04
0x04 Transaction
Type
See Table 10.26.
0x28 (
)
Swap data
fork
0x08
0x04 TID
The transaction ID
0x0C3BA9E3
0x0C 0x04 # Items
Number of operations after this,
not including the commit
operation.
0x09 (
)

Table 10.26 Transaction types as found in the transaction header structure.
Type Name
Type Name
Type Name
1
Set inode
attribute (not
size)
15
Start write
29
Disable quotas
2
Set inode size
16
Block allocation
30
Allocate disk quota
3
Inactive inode
17
Unused
31
Adjust quota limits
4
File creation
18
Update inode's
preallocation flag
32
Unknown
5
Create
truncated
19
Add attribute fork
33
Create quota inode
6
Truncate quota
file
20
Erase attribute fork 34
Finish disabling
quotas
7
Remove a file
21
Unknown
35
Update SB unit
8
Link inode to
directory
22
Set extended
attribute
36
Update inode
timestamps
9
Rename path
23
Remove extended
attribute
37
Grow real‐time
bitmap
10
Crete directory 24
Unknown
38
Zero real‐time
bitmap
11
Remove
directory
25
Clear bad inode
point in AGI
39
Free space in real‐
time bitmap
12
Create symlink 26
Change superblock 40
Swap data forks
13
Set DMAPI
attributes
27
Dummy 1
41
Update superblock
inode/block counts
14
Expand file
system
28
Dummy 2
42
Checkpoint create
Operation 
 contains 0x18 bytes of data. The first two bytes of this are
0x123C. This is a type of log item. To determine the exact type the value
must be looked up in Table 10.27 which shows this to be a buffer write

operation. The structure of a buffer write operation, with values from
Listing 10.24, is shown in Table 10.28.
Table 10.27 Log item magic values.
Signature Meaning
Signature Meaning
0x1236
Extent freeing
intent
0x123F
Inode creation
0x1237
Extent freeing done 0x1240
Reverse mapping update intent
0x1238
Unknown
0x1241
Reverse mapping update done
0x123B
Inode updates
0x1242
Reference count update intent
0x123C
Buffer writes
0x1243
Reference count update done
0x123D
Quota update
0x1244
File block mapping update
intent
0x123E
Quota off
0x1245
File block mapping update
done
Table 10.28 Buffer write operation structure. Values are taken from Listing
10.26.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x02 Magic
Signature value.
0x123C
0x02
0x02 Size
Number of buffer data items following
this one.
0x02 (
)
0x04
0x02 Flags
Flags associated with this buffer item.
0x2800
0x06
0x02 Length
Number of sectors changed.
0x01 (
)
0x08
0x08 Blk #
Sector number to be written.
0x01 (
)
0x10
0x04 Map size The size of the data map in four‐byte
entries.
0x01 (
)
0x14
Var
Data
Map
0x01 (
)

The next task is to continue processing the remaining operations in the
transaction. The operations that are of particular interest for file recovery
are operations 
, 
 and 
 which were seen in Listing 10.23. These
operations appear to be those that altered the content of inode 0x87. The
operations appear in Listing 10.27. For each operation the headers are
highlighted. The processed values of these headers appear in Table 10.29.
Table 10.29 Processed operation headers from Listing 10.27.
Offset Size Name
Op 8
Op 9
Op 10
0x00
0x04 TID
0x0C3BA9E3 0x0C3BA9E3 0x0C3BA9E3
0x04
0x04 Length 0x38 (
)
0xB0 (
) 0x10 (
)
0x08
0x01 CID
0x69 (
) 0x69 (
) 0x69 (
)
0x09
0x01 Flags
0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x0A 0x02 Padding 0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)

Examining the data of operation 
 shows the magic value to be 0x123B
(Table 10.30). Referring to Table 10.27 shows this to be an inode update.
The structure of the inode update log operation along with the values from
operation 
 is provided in Table 10.30.
Table 10.30 Processed inode update for operation 
.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x02 Type
Signature of inode update.
0x123B
0x02
0x02 Size
Number of operations involved
including this operation.
0x03 (
)
0x04
0x04 Fields
The parts of the inode being
updated (see Table 10.31).
0x05 (
)
0x08
0x02 Attr. Fork
Size
Size of the attribute fork (bytes).
0x00 (
)
0x0A 0x02 Data Fork
Size
Size of the data fork (bytes).
0x10 (
)
0x0C 0x04 Padding
Padding.
0x00 (
)
0x10
0x08 Inode
The inode number.
0x87 (
)
0x18
0x10 UUID
Device UUID.
0x00 (
)
0x28
0x08 Block #
Sector number of the inode buffer.
0x80 (
)
0x30
0x04 Length
Length of the inode buffer (in
sectors).
0x20 (
)
0x34
0x04 Buffer
offset
Byte offset of the inode in the
buffer.
0xE00 (
)

Table 10.31 Possible values for fields in the inode update operation.
Value
Description
Value
Description
0x0001 Inode core
0x0040 Attr fork (local)
0x0002 Data fork (local)
0x0080 Attr fork (extent)
0x0004 Data fork (extent) 0x0100 Attr fork (B‐Tree)
0x0008 Data fork (B‐Tree) 0x0200 Data fork (owner)
0x0010 Device number
0x0400 Attr fork (owner)
0x0020 UUID
Examining the inode update operation provides much useful information.
Firstly, and most importantly, the inode number to which this operation
refers to is identified. This is 0x87 in this case. Next the block to be updated
is discovered. This is block 0x80 (which was where the root directory was
found) and the byte offset in this block is 0xE00. Remember that each inode
occupies 0x200 bytes so this is the end of the seventh inode in the block (as
would be expected!). There are a total of three operations in this update,
meaning the next two operations (
 and 
) are also part of the update.
Finally, it is necessary to determine which parts of the inode are to be
updated. The fields value shows which should be updated. This value is
0x05 which is 
. Consulting Table 10.31 shows this to mean
that the inode core (0x01) and the data fork's extent structure will be
updated (0x04). The next two log operations should relate to these updates.
Processing continues with operation 
. Based on the content of the
previous operation this should be the actual content of the inode core
structure. Examining the data shows the first two bytes are NI, which is the
little‐endian version of the inode code IN. The most important piece of
information to gather from this point in order to aid file recovery is the file
size. This is located at offset 0x38 and contains the value 0xF6F0E. Hence
the file in question is 0xF6F0E bytes in size.
Finally, the extent structure is located in operation 
. The extent value is
0x138000F7. When processed this results in an extent starting at block
 which is 
 blocks in length. The combination of this
information along with the file size allows for the file to be extracted. The

command to do this is shown in Listing 10.28 along with the resulting
picture (Figure 10.7).
Figure 10.7 The recovered tree.jpg file.
10.4 Summary
The XFS file system is encountered in certain Linux distributions as the
standard file system in use. Although an older file system, it is generally

regarded as being more effective than ext for large‐scale data storage but it
still has a number of issues that have meant it has not seen more widespread
use. Particularly the resilience is not as good as that found in modern file
systems.
From a file system forensic perspective, XFS presents a number of specific
challenges that have not been encountered before. One of the main
challenges is that forensic tools do not support this file system. This is the
first file system examined in this book that is not supported by default by
any of the file system forensic tools that are in common usage.4 This means
that the results obtained in this chapter are impossible to validate using
other tools. Manual analysis is the only way forward. However, in Section
10.3.6, some of the file system tools were utilised to provide an overview of
the journal structure (xfs_logprint). While this is not a forensic tool it
provided a possible means of verifying some of the results. However, while
this tool allowed the file size to be obtained directly (see the output for
operation 
 in Listing 10.23) it would not allow for the actual extent itself
to be recovered as operation 
 was only described as being EXTENTS
Inode Data with no interpretation of the extent values.
In the case that forensic tools are unable to support a particular file system
it is always worth investigating the file system management tools that are
available to see if they may aid the analysis task. However, the analyst must
ensure that these tools do not change any of the data that will be relied upon
later in the investigation, as these tools are not designed with the forensic
process in mind.
Exercises
All questions in this section refer to the file system contained in
XFS_V4.E01.
1. What is the volume label?
2. How many allocation groups exist in the filesystem?
3. What is the block size?
4. In which block is the root directory inode found?
5. Process the root directory and list the files/folders contained within.

6. The root directory contains a file called info.txt. What is the inode of
this file?
7. In relation to info.txt answer the following questions:
a. What is the file size?
b. When was the file created?
c. In which block(s) are the file content found?
d. What is the MD5 of the file content?
8. Two directories were found in the root directory. List the contents of
these directories.
9. Process the files Links/hardlink.jpg and Links/softlink.jpg. To
which files are they linking?
10. A file called sunrise.jpg was deleted from the Pictures directory.
Using any means at your disposal, recover the contents of this file.
Bibliography
Hellwig, C. (2009). XFS: the big storage file system for Linux.;login:: the
magazine of USENIX. 34 (5): 10–18.
Kernel.org (2024). xfs/xfs‐linux.git ‐ XFS kernel development tree
[Internet]. git.kernel.org. [cited 2024 May 28].
https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/fs/xfs/xfs-linux.git/ (accessed 14 August
2024).
Kim, H., Kim, S., Shin, Y. et al. (2021). Ext4 and XFS file system forensic
framework based on TSK. Electronics 10 (18): 2310.
Nikkel, B. (2021). Practical Linux Foresnsics: A Guide for Digital
Investigators. San Francisco:No Starch Press.
Oracle (2024). Oracle Linux 6: Administrator's Solutions Guide [Internet].
docs.oracle.com. [cited 2024 March 26].
https://docs.oracle.com/en/operating-systems/oracle-
linux/6/adminsg/index.html (accessed 14 August 2024).

Oracle Help Center (2024). Managing the XFS File System [Internet].
Oracle Help Center. [cited 2024 March 26].
https://docs.oracle.com/en/operating-systems/oracle-
linux/8/fsadmin/fsadmin-ManagingtheXFSFileSystem.htmlxfs-main
(accessed 14 August 2024).
Park, Y., Chang, H., and Shon, T. (2015). Data investigation based on XFS
file system metadata. Multimedia Tools and Applications 75 (22):
14721–14743.
Pomeranz, H. (2018). XFS (Parts 1 –5) [internet]. righteousit.com. [cited
2024 June 19]. https://righteousit.com/2018/05/21/xfs-part-1-superblock/
(accessed 14 August 2024).
Red Hat Documentation (2024). Chapter 3. The XFS File System Red Hat
Enterprise Linux 7 –Red Hat Customer Portal [Internet].
access.redhat.com. https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-
us/red_hatenterprise_linux/7/html/storage_administration_guide/ch-xfs
(accessed 14 August 2024).
Tamma, K. and Venugopalan, S. (2024). Failure Analysis of SGI XFS File
System [Internet]. [cited 2024 Mar 26].
https://pages.cs.wisc.edu/vshree/xfs.pdf (accessed 14 August 2024).
The Linux Kernel (n.d.). The SGI XFS Filesystem –The Linux Kernel
documentation [Internet]. docs.kernel.org. [cited 2024 Mar 26].
https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/xfs.html (accessed 14 August 2024).
Vujičić, D., Marković, D., Đorđević, B., and Randić, S. (2016).
Benchmarking performance of ext4, xfs, and btrfs as guest file systems
under Linux environment. Proceedings of 3rd International Conference
on Electrical, Electronic and Computing Engineering IcETRAN, pp. 13–
16.
Wang, R.Y. and Anderson, T.E. (1993). xFS: A wide area mass storage file
system. Proceedings of IEEE 4th Workshop on Workstation Operating
Systems. WWOS‐III (14 October 1993), pp. 71–78. IEEE.
Wiki (2024). XFS Linux [Wiki] [Internet]. xfs.wiki.kernel.org. [cited 2024
March 26 3]. https://xfs.wiki.kernel.org/ (accessed 14 August 2024).

XFS Algorithms & Data Structures 3rd Edition (2024). [cited 2024 March
26].
https://mirror.math.princeton.edu/pub/kernel/linux/utils/fs/xfs/docs/xfs_f
ilesystem_structure.pdf (accessed 14 August 2024).
Notes
1 The current version of XFS is often referred to as Version 5. This is the
version that is analysed in this chapter.
2 For a complete list of signatures the reader is advised to consult XFS
Algorithms and Data Structures (Chapter 7).
3 The xfs_logprint command will not work on E01 files or files resulting
from the ewfmount command. The raw image must be exported using
the command ewfexport XFS_V3.E01.
4 There are some extensions written for Sleuth Kit that allow basic
processing of XFS but they are not part of the official release.
OceanofPDF.com

11
The Btrfs File System
Btrfs is a modern file system that uses B‐Trees as its main storage mechanism. The name is an abbreviation
of B‐Tree file system and is pronounced in many ways such as ‘butter fuss’, ‘b‐tree FS’, ‘better FS’ or most
commonly by spelling it out! Development of Btrfs began in 2007 when Chris Mason joined Oracle. The
first version of Btrfs was adopted into the mainline kernel in 2009. Currently (as of version 5) Oracle,
Western Digital, Facebook and SUSE are actively involved in the Btrfs development process. A number of
versions of SUSE Linux have used Btrfs as a replacement for ext as the primary file system. In August
2020, Fedora announced that Fedora 33 would use Btrfs as the default file system.
As a file system introduced to overcome space limitations of previous file systems Btrfs is able to store lots
of large files! Table 11.1 shows some of the theoretical limits of the file system. They are theoretical as not
all can be addressed in the current Linux kernel. While Btrfs can achieve these figures, the kernel cannot
access them so some of the limits are never reached.
Table 11.1 Btrfs file system limitations.
Metric
Value
Max. Volume Size
 bytes (16 EiB)
Max. File Size
 bytes (16 EiB)
Max. Number of
Files
 bytes (16 EiB)
Max. Filename
Length
255 bytes. This equates to 255 characters in ASCII encoding but less in other text
encodings.
Btrfs is considered a modern file system, much more so than ext4 which was only ever considered a stop‐
gap until a better file system arrived. Therefore, Btrfs provides support for a multitude of modern file
system principles such as:
B‐Tree‐Based File System: Btrfs uses B‐Trees to store all metadata information in the file system
(except for the superblock). B‐Trees consist of key‐item pairs. There are a number of B‐Trees used in
all Btrfs file systems. These are discussed later.
Copy‐on‐Write (CoW): Copy‐on‐write is a mechanism by which data is written to a disk only when
changes are made to that data. Consider the action of copying a file on a single volume on a traditional
file system. Copying exactly duplicates the underlying data, but makes no changes to that data. Btrfs
(and other file systems that employ copy‐on‐write) will not duplicate the data when a copy occurs.
Btrfs will increase the link count for the copy and will create another copy of the underlying data only
when one of the links changes. Even in the case where data is modified on‐disk, CoW generally means
that the block is copied to a free location, changes are made to the block and the metadata is then
updated. This means that Btrfs provides the possibility of finding older versions of files still in
existence. The same principle applies to metadata blocks, meaning that older versions of metadata can
also be found.
Multiple Device Support: Btrfs provides for logical file systems that span multiple devices. This can
take the form of JBOD (Just a Bunch of Disks) in which multiple physical devices are used to create
one single (large) logical device, or it can be used to implement RAID at the file system level.
Internally, in a logical Btrfs file system there are conceptually three areas on the device, the system,
metadata and data areas. The system area stores information about the logical address mapping, the
metadata area stores file system metadata and the data area stores file contents. By default, the system

and metadata chunks are duplicated, allowing for a simple form of metadata RAID in almost all Btrfs
filesystems.1
Extent‐Based File Storage: Extents provide a more flexible and scalable means of storing file content
than ext's traditional block pointer system.2 Extents are used in most modern file systems. Extents
generally contain a starting location and a size, meaning that two numbers can define a run of data
blocks. Files can have multiple extents.
Integrated Checksums: Btrfs uses a block‐level checksum feature, so that the integrity of each
metadata block can be verified. Each node in a tree has its own internal checksum as part of that node.
Btrfs also provides the CSUM_TREE which contains checksums of all extent data (file content) in the
file system.
Subvolumes: Subvolumes are smaller volumes inside the main Btrfs file system. All instances of Btrfs
contain one subvolume, the top‐level subvolume, which contains everything else in the file system.
When a Btrfs device is mounted, it is actually a subvolume that is being mounted. By default the top‐
level subvolume is mounted; however, it is possible to specify a different subvolume to be mounted.
Snapshots: Btrfs provides the ability to create snapshots, system states at particular points in time.
Generally this is done through logical means. CoW means that no changes are made to data until the
underlying structure is altered. Unlike a back‐up, not everything is copied immediately in a snapshot,
so a snapshot needs much less space than the backup. Snapshots are created in Btrfs by creating a
subvolume which is a copy‐on‐write copy of another subvolume.
Compression: At file system creation time Btrfs can be instructed to compress all data that is stored in
the file system. Note as of Version 5.9, internal encryption has not been implemented, but it is expected
as a feature in later versions.
Btrfs is a modern file system and is still under development. The current version is 5.17 (as of 2023).
11.1 On‐Disk Structures
In order to analyse a Btrfs filesystem it is necessary to understand the types of structures that are present
and where they will be encountered on the file system. In this section some of the common structures of
interest to the analysis of Btrfs are described. It begins by describing the various B‐Trees that are used for
metadata storage in the file system. The internal structure of tree nodes is then described. All Btrfs trees are
structured in the same manner so understanding these structures allows all metadata information in the file
system to be located.
Btrfs trees store key‐item pairs, the key provides information on the type of item and where it is located.
There are a number of items in the Btrfs file system. In order to analyse the file system it is necessary to
understand the various item types that are present in the file system. Of course it is also necessary to be able
to locate the trees and items on the file system. Btrfs uses a single logical address space which is mapped to
a physical address space using the chunk and device trees. These concepts are explained later in this section.
Finally this section describes how time is stored in Btrfs. Please note that, unless otherwise stated, all
structures in Btrfs are stored in a little‐endian format.
An understanding of these structures will allow the manual processing of Btrfs file systems later in this
chapter. As with XFS, this is important as, generally, forensic tools do not provide support for Btrfs.
11.1.1 The Superblock
Like many file systems Btrfs contains a superblock which provides information about the file system as a
whole. The superblock serves the same purpose in Btrfs as it does in ext and as the volume boot record does
in FAT and NTFS. From the superblock information relating to the data allocation units on the devices
(sectors, nodes and leaves in the case of Btrfs), the logical addresses of certain trees that are required to

rebuild all data and metadata in the file system, etc. are determined. The superblock is the initial starting
point in the analysis of Btrfs.
There are multiple copies of the superblock structure in the file system. In Btrfs these superblocks are stored
at specific absolute addresses. The primary copy of the superblock is stored at byte offset 0x10000 (64 
KiB). Backup copies are stored at byte offsets 0x4000000 (64 MiB) and 0x4000000000 (256 GiB) if these
locations are valid. In the case of Btrfs file systems with multiple devices, each device contains copies of
the superblock at each of these offsets. All superblock copies are updated simultaneously.
The superblock can also be used to recognise a Btrfs file system. Listing 11.1 shows an excerpt from a Btrfs
superblock structure. At offset 0x40 in the superblock structure the Btrfs signature is found. This value is
_BHRfS_M.
The structure of the superblock is provided in Table 11.2.

Table 11.2 Btrfs superblock structure.
Offset Size
Name
Description
0x00
0x20
Checksum
Checksum of all data in the superblock from the end of the checksum
field to the end of the node.
0x20
0x10
UUID
The unique universal identifier for this file system.
0x30
0x08
Node Address
Logical address of this node.
0x38
0x07
Flags
File system flags.
0x3F
0x01
Backref Version
Always 1 in new file systems. A value of zero indicates an older file
system.
0x40
0x08
Signature
Btrfs signature _BHRfS_M.
0x48
0x08
Generation
A counter used to ensure file system integrity.
0x50
0x08
ROOT_TREE Addr. Logical address of the ROOT_TREE root.
0x58
0x08
CHUNK_TREE
Addr.
Logical address of the CHUNK_TREE root.
0x60
0x08
LOG_TREE Addr.
Logical address of the LOG_TREE root.
0x68
0x08
Log Root Transid
Transaction ID tree address.
0x70
0x08
# Bytes
Total number of bytes in the file system.
0x78
0x08
# Bytes Used
Total number of bytes used in the file system.
0x80
0x08
Root Dir. OID
The object ID (OID) for the root directory (usually 0x06).
0x88
0x08
# Devices
The number of devices in the file system.
0x90
0x04
Sector Size
The sector size of the file system.
0x94
0x04
Node Size
The size of each tree node in the file system.
0x98
0x04
Leaf Size
The leaf node size of the file system.
0x9C
0x04
Stripe Size
The stripe size of the file system.
0xA0 0x04
CHUNK_ARRAY
Size
The size of the CHUNK_ARRAY in bytes.
0xA4 0x08
Chunk Root Gen.
The chunk root generation.
0xAC 0x08
Compat Flags
Compatibility flags for mounting this file system.
0xB4
0x08
Compat RO Flags
Read‐only compatibility flags. If a driver does not support any of these
flags then the file system should be mounted as read‐only.
0xBC 0x08
Incompat Flags
Drivers that do not support any of these flags may not use the file
system.
0xC4
0x02
Checksum Type
Currently CRC32c.
0xC6
0x01
Root Level
The level of the ROOT_TREE.
0xC7
0x01
Chunk Root Level
The level of the CHUNK_TREE.
0xC8
0x01
Log Root Level
The level of the LOG_ROOT_TREE.
0xC9
0x62
DEV_ITEM
The DEV_ITEM for the device on which this superblock is found.
0x12B 0x100 File System Label
An 0x100 byte character array which contains the file system label.
0x32B 0x800 CHUNK_ARRAY
An excerpt from the CHUNK_TREE used to bootstrap
logical/physical address mapping.

11.1.2 Btrfs Trees
The B‐Tree in Btrfs is, as in many modern file systems, the basic structure for metadata storage. There are a
number of system B‐Trees that are located in Btrfs file systems. In this section these common trees are
listed and the purpose of each is described. In each case the name of the tree is provided along with its
object ID (OID).3 The reserved trees include:
ROOT_TREE (OID: 0x01): The ROOT_TREE (sometimes referred to as the tree of trees) is the
primary structure required for rebuilding the file system and all other metadata structures. The
ROOT_TREE contains information about the location of all other trees in the system. The logical
address of the ROOT_TREE itself is located in the superblock.
EXTENT_TREE (OID: 0x02): The EXTENT_TREE contains information about the data and
metadata allocation in the file system. It provides information on the locations at which various types
of data both can be and are currently stored in the file system.
CHUNK_TREE (OID: 0x03): The CHUNK_TREE contains information about all devices that are
present in the file system. The CHUNK_TREE is the structure used to map logical to physical
addresses. The logical file system is divided into a number of chunks, entries for which appear in the
CHUNK_TREE. These entries provide the physical stripes associated with the logical address, thereby
allowing the logical addresses to be converted to physical addresses. The CHUNK_TREE is a vital
structure required to locate other structures and file locations.
DEV_TREE (OID: 0x04): The DEV_TREE is used in situations where it is necessary to map a
logical to a physical address. This structure is generally used when device configuration is changed in
a file system, which is not something that digital forensics aims to do. Hence, this tree is generally of
little interest to the digital forensic process.
FS_TREE (OID: 0x05): The FS_TREE (or file system tree) allows the contents of the entire file
system to be rebuilt. This structure contains inode information about every file and directory.
Processing this structure allows all files in the file system to be listed and recovered and also to recover
associated metadata. This structure is one of the most vital in the digital forensic process.
The Root Directory Tree (generally OID: 0x06): This provides a representation of the root directory
(it actually points to the FS_TREE). To date all root directory trees have the OID 0x06. This is
specified in the superblock and may change at a later date.
CSUM_TREE (OID: 0x07): The CSUM_TREE is used to validate data. It contains checksums for
each data extent in the file system.
11.1.3 Btrfs Tree Structure
B‐trees are composed of one or more nodes. From the superblock the size of nodes in a particular file
system is discovered. Btrfs provides two different types of node, internal and leaf nodes. Internal nodes
contain pointers to other nodes, while leaf nodes contain the actual data in the form of key/item pairs. Every
node, regardless of whether it is an internal or leaf node, begins with a node header. The remainder of this
section describes the node structures in further details.
11.1.3.1 Node Header Structure
Every node in every B‐Tree begins with a node header of 0x65 bytes in length. This header provides
information about the node and the tree that contains it. It also provides the number of items that are present
in the node and the node level. The structure of the node header is given in Table 11.3.
Subsequent data depends on the type of node in question, internal or leaf. Both internal and leaf node
structures follow.

Table 11.3 Btrfs B‐Tree node header structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x20 Checksum
Checksum of all data in the block from the end of the checksum field to the end
of the node.
0x20
0x10 UUID
The unique universal identifier for this file system.
0x30
0x08 Node Addr.
Logical address of this node.
0x38
0x07 Flags
File system flags.
0x3F
0x01 Backref
Revision
Always 1 in new file systems. A value of zero indicates an older file system.
0x40
0x10 UUID
CHUNK_TREE UUID.
0x50
0x08 Generation
As found in the superblock.
0x58
0x08 Tree OID Int The OID of the tree that contains this node.
0x60
0x04 # Items
Number of items in this node.
0x64
0x01 Node Level
Leaf nodes are level 0. Any other numbers represent internal nodes. The
number represents how many layers of internal nodes need to be traversed in
order to reach a leaf node.
In a leaf node the header is immediately followed by a number of items. Item data is stored at the end of the
node. A key to the item data location is stored immediately after the node header. This structure is shown in
Figure 11.1.
Figure 11.1 Btrfs B‐Tree leaf node structure.
Figure 11.1 shows a leaf node with three items. The key pointers commence immediately after the node
header (node offset: 0x65). Key pointers are 0x19 (
) bytes in size and are composed of a 0x11 byte
item key structure (see Section 11.1.4) followed by a four‐byte value representing the offset to the start of
the data item. This offset is relative to the end of the node header. The final four bytes in the key pointer
contain the size of the data item (in bytes). Table 11.4 summarises this structure.
Table 11.4 Leaf node key pointer structure.
Offset Size Name Description
0x00
0x11 Key
The item key (see Section 11.1.4).
0x11
0x04 Offset Byte offset to the start of the data item relative to the end of the node header (0x65).
0x15
0x04 Size
Data item size in bytes.
The data item structures are dependent on the type of item that is referenced. Section 11.1.5 describes each
of the item types available in Btrfs in more detail.
11.1.3.2 Internal Node Structure
Internal nodes are used when trees become too large for a single node. Instead of containing pointers to data
items inside the node itself, they contain pointers to other nodes in the tree. These other nodes may be leaf
or internal nodes. In the latter case, they will contain pointers to yet more nodes.

Figure 11.2 Btrfs B‐Tree internal node structure.
Figure 11.2 shows the structure of an internal node in a Btrfs B‐tree. The key pointer structure is provided in
Table 11.5.
Table 11.5 Internal node key pointer structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x11 Key
The item key (see Section 11.1.4).
0x11
0x08 Node Addr. Logical address of the next node in the tree.
0x19
0x08 Generation Generation.
11.1.4 Btrfs Keys
When examining the structure of pointers in both the internal and leaf nodes the concept of the item key
was encountered. These keys act as a form of identifier for item types. The key structure is 0x11 bytes in
size and is shown in Table 11.6.
Table 11.6 Btrfs key structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x08 OID
The object ID to which this key refers.
0x08
0x01 Item Type The type of item represented by this key (see Section 11.1.5).
0x09
0x08 Offset
The meaning of this value is dependent on the item type in question.
The key is used to sort items in a tree node. Note that when describing the various trees used in Btrfs some
use negative OID values (Section 11.1.2); however, the OID field is an unsigned integer. This means that an
OID of 
 (0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF) will appear at the very end of the list and not before the positive
OIDs as would be expected.
11.1.5 Btrfs Items
The item type field in the key describes the type of item that is present. There are a number of item types in
Btrfs some of which are listed below. The reader should be aware that it is not generally necessary to fully
understand all the item types as the majority have little use in the forensic process. Below are found the
more commonly required items for forensic analysis of Btrfs. The reader is encouraged to discover more
information at the Btrfs kernel wiki if required.4
INODE_ITEM (Type: 0x01): The INODE_ITEM provides all metadata in relation to a file or
directory. This is the structure that is read by the Linux stat command when it seeks information about
a file. In Btrfs INODE_ITEMs are mainly located in file trees (e.g. FS_TREE) but can also be found in
the ROOT_TREE. The key offset for an INODE_ITEM has no meaning and as such is always set to
zero. Table 11.7 shows the structure of an INODE_ITEM.

Table 11.7 INODE_ITEM structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x08 Generation
Generation.
0x08
0x08 Transid
Transaction ID.
0x10
0x08 File Size
(actual)
Size of the file in bytes.
0x18
0x08 File Size (alloc) Size of the file in allocated bytes (complete blocks).
0x20
0x08 Block group
Generally unused related to free space management.
0x28
0x04 # Links
Number of links to the file. This is actually a count of the number of
INODE_REF items pointing to this OID in Btrfs.
0x2C 0x04 UID
User ID (UID).
0x30
0x04 GID
Group ID (GID).
0x34
0x04 Mode
As in ext containing file type and permissions.
0x38
0x08 RDev
Generally unused in modern systems.
0x40
0x08 Flags
Inode Flags.
0x48
0x08 Sequence Num. Used for NFS compatibility. This value is incremented every time the
modification time changes.
0x50
0x20 Reserved
Reserved for future use.
0x70
0x0C Access Time
Access time structure (see Section 11.1.6).
0x7C 0x0C Change Time
Metadata change time structure (see Section 11.1.6).
0x88
0x0C Modification
Time
Modification time structure (see Section 11.1.6).
0x94
0x0C Creation
Structure
Inode creation time structure (see Section 11.1.6).
Again parallels exist with the ext inode structure. The reason for this is that these are all Linux file
systems and must function with the stat command. From the INODE_ITEM we can also see that
Btrfs stores four timestamps. The traditional ext times of modified, accessed and changed and also the
time of inode creation. The Btrfs kernel wiki provides more information on the flags used in the
INODE_ITEM.
INODE_REF (Type: 0x0C):
The INODE_REF stores information about the filename. Specifically it maps an inode (Object ID) to
a name in a directory similar to a directory entry in ext. The INODE_REF item is generally found in
file trees but can also be found in the ROOT_TREE. The structure of an INODE_REF is given in
Table 11.8.
Table 11.8 INODE_REF structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x08 Directory Index
Used for ordering items in the directory.
0x08
0x02 Name Length (n) The length of the name in bytes.
0x0A (n)
File Name
The file name. The length is discovered in the previous field.
When dealing with an INODE_REF item, the key offset is the OID of the parent directory. Consider
the key for an INODE_REF item shown in Listing 11.2.

In this we see that the OID of the Object being referred to is 0x1A1. The key offset is 0x107. This
means that inode 0x107 is the parent of inode 0x11A.
DIR_ITEM (Type: 0x54): The DIR_ITEM is found in directories and contains directory entries. The
key offset for the DIR_ITEM contains the hashed value of the file name in the DIR_ITEM. This allows
for faster searching for particular DIR_ITEM values. DIR_ITEMs can contain information about
multiple files if those filenames' hash to the same value. Table 11.9 provides the DIR_ITEM structure.
Table 11.9 DIR_ITEM structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x11 Key
Key of the INODE_ITEM associated with this entry.
0x11
0x08 Transid
Transaction ID.
0x19
0x02 Xattr Length
Length of the extended attribute. 0 for standard dirs.
0x1B 0x02 Dir Name
Length
Length of the directory name in bytes. The name follows immediately
after this structure.
0x1D 0x01 Type
Valid values include:
0x00: Unknown
0x01: Regular File
0x02: Directory
0x03: Character Device
0x04: Block Device
0x05: FIFO Device
0x06: Socket Device
0x07: Symbolic Link
0x08: XATTR_ITEM
DIR_ITEMs are examined when attempting to rebuild the list of files/directories present in a file
system.
DIR_INDEX (Type: 0x60): The contents of the DIR_INDEX are identical to those of the DIR_ITEM
but the key offset is different. The key offset provides an index to the position of the item in the
directory. The first index position is 2, presumably to allow for the . and .. directories.
EXTENT_DATA (Type: 0x6C): The EXTENT_DATA item provides information on where the file
contents are stored. In Btrfs file content can be stored inline or using extents. In both cases the required
information is available in the EXTENT_DATA item. The key offset for an EXTENT_DATA item
provides the offset within the file that the particular extent represents. This value is 0x00 for files
which have only a single extent or for the first extent in a file. EXTENT_ITEMs are found in file trees.
The EXTENT_DATA item contains a 0x15 byte header. The structure of this is described in Table
11.10. In the case of inline storage, the file content is found immediately after the header. In the case
of regular extent‐based storage the structure in Table 11.11 is found.

Table 11.10 EXTENT_DATA header structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x08 Generation
Generation.
0x08
0x08 Decoded Ext. Size
(n)
The size of the decoded extent in bytes.
0x10
0x01 Compression
The compression algorithm used (0: none; 1: zlib; 2: LZO).
0x11
0x01 Encryption
The encryption algorithm used (0: none).
0x12
0x02 Other encoding
Any other encodings that might be used (0: none).
0x14
0x01 Extent Type
The storage mechanism used in this EXTENT_DATA item (0: Inline;
1: Regular; 2: Preallocated).
Table 11.11 Subsequent data in EXTENT_DATA structure for a regular file.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x15
0x08 Logical
Address
Starting logical address of the extent. Zero means the entire extent consists
of zero values.
0x1D 0x08 Size
Size of the extent.
0x25
0x08 Offset
Offset within the extent.
0x2D 0x08 # Bytes
Logical number of bytes in file (note this is not the file size, it is the
allocated bytes). Consult the INODE_ITEM in order to determine the file
size.
The size of the extent at 0x1D may differ from the size at 0x08. This is due to data encoding. Once the
bytes located in the extent are decoded there should then be (n) bytes of data resulting.
EXTENT_CSUM (Type: 0x80): EXTENT_CSUMs are found in the CSUM_TREE and contain
checksums for particular data areas on the device.
ROOT_ITEM (Type: 0x84): ROOT_ITEMs are located only in the ROOT_TREE. The key offset for
a ROOT_ITEM is 0x00 in the case of a normal subvolume. For a snapshot this key offset contains the
transaction ID (TID) that created the snapshot. The ROOT_ITEM structure allows the root of a B‐tree
to be located. The structure of the ROOT_ITEM is given in Table 11.12.
While the ROOT_ITEM structure contains more information than that listed in Table 11.12, most of it
is relevant only if subvolumes are in use. The key field in the ROOT_ITEM is the logical address of
the root node for the tree.

Table 11.12 ROOT_ITEM structure.
Offset Size
Name
Description
0x00
0xA0 INODE_ITEM An INODE_ITEM representing certain information about the tree root.
Not all of the INODE_ITEM information is initialised.
0xA0 0x08 Transid
Transaction ID.
0xA8 0x08 Root Dir. ID
The root directory ID – always 0x100 for file trees, 0 otherwise.
0xB0 0x08 Root Node
Addr.
The logical address of the root node of this tree.
0xB8 0x08 Unused
Unused.
0xC0 0x08 Unused
Unused.
0xC8 0x08 Transid (Snap)
The transid of the transaction that created the last snapshot of this root.
0xD0 0x08 Flags
Flags from INODE_ITEM apply.
0xD8 0x04 Ref. Count
Originally indicated a reference count. Now it is only 0 or 1.
0xDC 0x11 Key
Contains the key of the last item dropped during subvolume relocation.
Zero otherwise.
0xED 0x01 Level
The tree level of the node described in the previous field.
0xEE 0x01 Height
The height of tree to which this ROOT_ITEM refers.
ROOT_BACKREF (Type: 0x90): Contains the same content as the ROOT_REF (0x9C). The key for
the ROOT_BACKREF item contains the subtreeID, the type (0x90) and the parent tree id.
ROOT_REF (Type: 0x9C): ROOT_REF contains information about subvolumes such as the volume's
name. This and the ROOT_BACKREF items are found only in the ROOT_TREE.
DEV_ITEM (Type: 0xD8): The DEV_ITEM provides information about the Device. DEV_ITEMS
are found in the CHUNK_TREE, which contains a DEV_ITEM for each individual device in the file
system. The key offset for the DEV_ITEM is the device ID. Table 11.13 provides the structure of the
DEV_ITEM.
Table 11.13 DEV_ITEM structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x08 Device ID
Device ID.
0x08
0x08 # Bytes
Total number of bytes on the device.
0x10
0x08 # Bytes Used
Number of used bytes on the device.
0x18
0x04 Opt. I/O Align. Optimal I/O alignment.
0x1C 0x04 Opt. I/O Width Optimal I/O width.
0x20
0x04 Sector Size
Sector size.
0x24
0x08 Type
Type.
0x2C 0x08 Generation
Generation.
0x34
0x08 Start Offset
Start Offset.
0x3C 0x04 Device Group Device group.
0x40
0x01 Seek Speed
Seek speed.
0x41
0x01 Bandwidth
Bandwidth.
0x42
0x10 Device UUID
A UUID for the device represented by this DEV_ITEM.
0x52
0x10 FS UUID
A UUID for the file system present on this device.

CHUNK_ITEM (Type: 0xE4): The Btrfs logical address space is broken into a number of non‐
overlapping chunks. The CHUNK_ITEM associates these logical address spaces with one or more
physical addresses. There are three different types of chunk used depending on the type of data that is
stored in them. These are data, metadata and system chunks. The data chunks are used to store data
blocks only, while all file metadata is stored in the metadata chunk. Inline data is also stored in the
metadata chunk. The system chunk is used to store B‐Trees related to the address mapping process.
The key offset for a CHUNK_ITEM contains the logical address at which the chunk starts. Table
11.14 describes the structure of the CHUNK_ITEM. CHUNK_ITEMs contain one or more stripes
which describe physical areas on the device. The number of stripes is found in the CHUNK_ITEM.
The stripe structure is also found in Table 11.14.
Table 11.14 CHUNK_ITEM structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x08 Chunk Size
The size of this chunk in bytes.
0x08
0x08 OID
Root referencing this chunk.
0x10
0x08 Stripe Length The length of each stripe in bytes.
0x18
0x04 Type
Purpose unknown.
0x1C 0x04 Opt. I/O Align Optimal I/O alignment.
0x20
0x04 Opt. I/O
Width
Optimal I/O width.
0x24
0x08 Sector Size
The sector size in bytes.
0x2C 0x08 # Stripes
The number of stripes.
0x34
0x08 # Sub‐Stripes
The number of sub‐stripes.
Stripes (for each stripe defined above)
0x00
0x08 Device ID
The device ID in the current file system.
0x08
0x08 Offset
The starting byte offset of the physical addresses associated with this
stripe.
0x10
0x10 UUID
The UUID for the device.
Chunks which contain multiple stripes are actually duplicating data. If a chunk contains two stripes
then there will exist two copies of any data stored in that chunk! The CHUNK_ITEM is the structure
that allows this duplication (i.e. simple RAID) to occur.
STRING_ITEM (Type: 0xFD): A STRING_ITEM merely contains a string in the data field. It is used
exclusively for developmental testing and is never encountered in a deployed file system.
Other types of item in Btrfs include INODE_EXTREF (Type: 0x0D); XATTR_ITEM (Type: 0x18);
ORPHAN_ITEM (Type: 0x30); DIR_LOG_ITEM (Type: 0x3C); DIR_LOG_INDEX (Type: 0x48);
EXTENT_ITEM (Type: 0xA8); METADATA_ITEM (Type: 0xA9); TREE_BLOCK_REF (Type: 0xB0);
EXTENT_DATA_REF (Type: 0xB2); EXTENT_REF_V0 (Type: 0xB4); SHARED_BLOCK_REF (Type:
0xB6); SHARED_DATA_REF (Type: 0xC0); BLOCK_GROUP_ITEM (Type: 0xC0); and DEV_EXTENT
(Type: 0xCC). Further information on these items, if required, can be found in the Btrfs kernel wiki.
11.1.6 Time in Btrfs
As always in digital forensics the time storage mechanisms that are employed in any artefact are of interest.
Btrfs uses a 64‐bit Unix time with nano‐second resolution. The time in Btrfs is stored as UTC. The resultant
structure is a 12‐byte structure shown in Table 11.15.

Table 11.15 Btrfs time structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x08 Unix Time
Seconds since the epoch (01‐01‐1970). This value is unsigned.
0x08
0x04 Nanoseconds The nanosecond component of the time value.
Consider the scenario in which a unix time value of 
 and a nanosecond component of
 are recovered. Listing 11.3 shows how this can be converted to a human‐readable form.
Remember, with the Linux date command the exact output format can be specified. The above format will
allow all times to be easily sorted using any standard sorting algorithm!
11.1.7 Logical and Physical Addressing
All addresses in Btrfs are provided as logical addresses. When a logical address is discovered, the first task
is to map it to the corresponding physical address(es).5 To do this, the CHUNK_TREE is used. However,
the CHUNK_TREE address provided in the superblock is itself a logical address. Hence, an excerpt from
the CHUNK_TREE is provided at offset 0x32B in the superblock. Generally this will just contain the
system chunk in which the CHUNK_TREE will be stored. This area of the superblock is called the
CHUNK_ARRAY and it consists of an array of (key, CHUNK_ITEM) pairs.
In order to map a logical address to a physical address, the entire CHUNK_TREE is required. Table 11.16
shows a CHUNK_TREE structure, with the key offsets provided. This CHUNK_TREE is from a single
device file system created using the mkfs.btrfs default values.
Table 11.16 Sample partial CHUNK_TREE for a single device file system.
Description
CHUNK 1
CHUNK 2
CHUNK 3
Key Offset
0xC00000
0x1400000
0x1C00000
(
) (
) (
)
Chunk Size (bytes) 0x800000
0x800000
0x33300000
(
)
(
)
(
)
Type
0x01 (
)
0x22 (
)
0x24 (
)
Num. Stripes
0x01 (
)
0x02 (
)
0x02 (
)
Sub‐Stripes
0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
Stripe 1
Device ID
0x01 (
)
0x01 (
)
0x01 (
)
Offset
0xC00000
0x1400000
0x2400000
(
) (
) (
)
Stripe 2
Device ID
N/A
0x01 (
)
0x01 (
)
Offset
N/A
0x1C00000
0x5730000
(
) (
)

Certain information about the file system can be discovered merely by examining the CHUNK_TREE. For
instance both CHUNK_ITEMs 2 and 3 contain two stripes. This means that any information in either of
these chunks is duplicated, whereas CHUNK_ITEM 1 contains only a single stripe meaning that there will
be only one copy of this information.
In order to convert a target logical address (
) to a physical address (
) the chunk in which 
appears must be located. To do this the chunk logical address (
) which contains 
, in other words,
the value of 
 which is nearest to, but not greater than 
 must be located. The 
 value is the key
offset in Table 11.16. The difference between 
 and 
 is calculated and added to one (or more) of the
 addresses. The result of this is the 
 address.
Consider the logical address 
 and the interpreted CHUNK_TREE provided in Table
11.16. The nearest 
 is in CHUNK_ITEM 3 (
). The target physical address is then
given by:
=
{Substitute Values }
=
{Calculate }
= 0x2520000
From the logical address of 0x1D20000 one of the corresponding physical addresses is 0x2520000, when
using the stripe offset 0x2400000. As CHUNK_ITEM 3 contains 
 stripes either of the stripe offsets
could be used. The other corresponding physical address in the second stripe would be given as 0x5742000.
11.2 Analysis of Btrfs
At the time of writing, Btrfs is not supported by any of the forensic tools. None of the commercial tools
mention Btrfs, and there is no official Sleuth Kit support. There are some additional packages available
from other developers that integrate with the Sleuth Kit, but none of these have been tested by the author.
With no tool support for Btrfs all analysis must be done manually. Image files are available from the book's
website. The contents of these images are described in Section 11.2.2.
11.2.1 Creating Btrfs File Systems
Btrfs file systems are created using the mkfs.btrfs command which, if not already installed by default, is
available in a package called btrfs‐tools for most Debian‐based systems. The output of the mkfs.btrfs
command is shown in Listing 11.4.

The output from this command immediately provides some of the information that can be located in the file
system itself. For instance, this file system was created with the label ‘BtrFS‐FS’ and the B‐tree node size is
 bytes with a sector size of 
 bytes.
One of the more interesting aspects of this output is the Block Group Profiles. As mentioned previously,
there are three types of block group (or chunk) in the Btrfs file system: data, metadata and system. The data
and system block groups have 8.00 MiB used, while metadata has 32.00 MiB used. The schemes given are
single for data and DUP (meaning duplicate) for the other block groups. This means that metadata and
system chunks are duplicated; in other words, a second copy of each of these exists on the file system,
allowing for some form of redundancy.
Once the file system was created multiple files/directories were created on the device. The structure of the
device after these creation operations is shown in Listing 11.5. Note the inode numbers are included in the
long listing.
An image, Btrfs_V1.E01, was then created of this device. A secondary image file was created after
Files/delete.txt and Files/river.jpg were deleted from the original image. The resulting image file is called
Btrfs_V2.E01. The structure of this is shown in Listing 11.6. Initially this section will manually analyse the
Btrfs_V1.E01 file.

11.2.2 Supplied Btrfs Image Files
There is a supporting file available from the book's website which provides an archive containing six image
files of Btrfs file systems in various configurations. These files are summarised in Table 11.17. Note that the
BtrFS_Raid1* files are both part of the same RAID 1 file system and will need to be analysed in parallel.
Table 11.17 Summary of provided Btrfs image files.
Filename
Description
BtrFS_V1.E01
New filesystem with four files and one directory.
BtrFS_V2.E01
BtrFS_V1.E01 with two files deleted.
BtrFS_V3.E01
This file system contains a directory with a large number of files. This ensures that
internal nodes are required in the file system tree.
BtrFS_V4.E01
A Btrfs file system containing a subvolume and snapshot.
BtrFS_Raid1_D1.E01 Device 1 from Btrfs RAID 1 array.
BtrFS_Raid1_D2.E01 Device 2 from Btrfs RAID 1 array.
11.2.3 Btrfs Analysis Methodology
This section presents a method of analysing Btrfs file systems. Firstly the analysis process begins by trying
to rebuild the current file system, listing all files/directories, recovering file contents and metadata. It then
examines methods to perform more advanced forms of analysis on the Btrfs file system.
In order to recover the basic information about all files/directories present on the Btrfs file system, the
following process is followed.
1. Process the Superblock: Like most file systems the superblock contains information about the file
system as a whole. In particular it is used to discover the logical address for the CHUNK_TREE and
the ROOT_TREE. It also contains interesting information such as the File System UUID and the
number of devices in the file system.
2. Process the CHUNK_ARRAY: The CHUNK_TREE allows the mapping of logical addresses to their
physical counterparts. However, after processing the superblock only a logical address for the
CHUNK_TREE is found. In order to perform this mapping, part of the CHUNK_TREE is stored in the
superblock. This is called the CHUNK_ARRAY. This structure is processed next to allow
bootstrapping of the CHUNK_TREE.
3. Locate the CHUNK_TREE: The next step is to locate the physical address of the CHUNK_TREE.
This is done using the logical address of the CHUNK_TREE located in Step 1, and the
CHUNK_ARRAY discovered in Step 2.

4. Process the CHUNK_TREE: Following this the entire CHUNK_TREE is processed. Once this
structure is rebuilt it allows all logical addresses to be converted to their physical counterparts.
5. Locate the ROOT_TREE: From the logical ROOT_TREE address discovered in Step 1, combined
with the CHUNK_TREE in Step 4, the physical address of the ROOT_TREE is located.
6. Locate the FS_TREE: The ROOT_TREE is the 'tree‐of‐trees' containing information relating to all
trees in the file system. In order to rebuild the file/directory structure the FS_TREE must be processed.
In this step the FS_TREE is located by processing the ROOT_ITEM for the FS_TREE in the
ROOT_TREE. The FS_TREE's OID is 0x05. The ROOT_ITEM will provide the logical address of the
FS_TREE for which the CHUNK_TREE is then required in order to convert this to the physical
address.
7. Process the FS_TREE: The FS_TREE provides information on all the files and directories in the file
system. It allows the analyst to determine which objects are files and which are directories.
8. Process Directories: In order to rebuild the file system each individual directory in the file system
must be processed. This allows the contents of the entire file system to be listed.
9. Recover File Metadata: It is then necessary to recover file (and directory) metadata. This is achieved
by processing the INODE_ITEMs for each individual file/directory.
10. Recover File Content: The final step in the analysis is to recover the file's contents. Content locations
are provided by the EXTENT_DATA structures.
There are some scenarios with Btrfs in which the analysis methodology may change slightly. For instance in
the case of a Btrfs file system with snapshots or subvolumes there will be multiple file trees (similar to
FS_TREE) which must be located and analysed. There is also a backup roots section of the superblock
which can be analysed after the above process has been completed in order to see what older tree structures
(and possibly data) are still present on the file system. Furthermore in the case of Btrfs file systems with
multiple devices it might be necessary to rebuild the DEV_TREE in addition to the CHUNK_TREE. These
special cases are considered later in the chapter; for now the next section analyses a simple Btrfs file system
using the above steps.
11.2.4 Manual Analysis of a Single Device File System
For the remainder of this section the BtrFS_V1.E01 file will be examined in detail. The aim of this task is
to provide the reader with the skills necessary to list files in a Btrfs file system and to recover these files
along with the associated metadata.
11.2.4.1 Process the Superblock
The first step in the forensic analysis of Btrfs is to analyse the superblock. The superblock provides
information about the file system as a whole and also provides access to the chunk tree which is used to
map the logical and physical addresses. The primary superblock is located at 0x10000. An excerpt from the
superblock in BtrFS_V1.E01 is shown in Listing 11.7.

Listing 11.7 confirms this is a Btrfs superblock. The Btrfs signature value and file system UUID are
highlighted. As analysis proceeds this value should be confirmed in all tree nodes to ensure they belong to
this file system. Note that it may be possible to discover old file systems if validly formatted tree nodes
which contain other UUID values are discovered. The interpretation of this superblock is provided in Table
11.18.

Table 11.18 Partially processed superblock values for BtrFS_V1.E01.
Offset Size
Name
Value
0x00
0x20
Checksum
0x93F4DD3B
0x20
0x10
FS UUID
0x2F72…7816
0x30
0x08
Address
0x10000 (
)
0x38
0x08
Flags
0x01 (
)
0x40
0x08
Signature
_BHRfS_M
0x48
0x08
FS Generation
0x0A (
)
0x50
0x08
ROOT_TREE Addr.
0x1D58000 (
)
0x58
0x08
CHUNK_TREE Addr.
0x1504000 (
)
0x70
0x08
# Bytes
0x20000000 (
)
0x78
0x08
# Bytes Used
0x98000 (
)
0x80
0x08
Root Dir. OID
0x06 (
)
0x88
0x08
# Devices
0x01 (
)
0x90
0x04
Sector Size
0x1000 (
)
0x94
0x04
Node Size
0x4000 (
)
0xA0 0x04
CHUNK_ARRAY Size 0x81 (
)
0xA4 0x08
Chunk Root Generation 0x05 (
)
0xC6
0x01
Root Level
0x00 (
)
0xC7
0x01
Chunk Root Level
0x00 (
)
0xC9
0x62
DEV_ITEM
See Section 11.1.5.
0x12B 0x100 Label
BtrFS‐FS
From Table 11.18 some of the expected information based on the output of the mkfs.btrfs command is
found. For instance the node size is 0x4000 (
) bytes and the sector size is 0x1000 (
) bytes.
Notice the file system generation value (0x0A). In Btrfs file systems, due to the copy‐on‐write principles,
older versions of structures exist on the file system. The generation number identifies the stage at which this
structure was created/modified. Finally the logical addresses for both the ROOT_TREE and the
CHUNK_TREE, two structures that are needed in order to rebuild the file system, are also found.
11.2.4.2 Process the CHUNK_ARRAY
After processing the superblock the logical address for the ROOT_TREE has been determined but there is
no means of mapping that logical address to a physical one. In order to do this the CHUNK_TREE must be
rebuilt. However, only the logical address for the CHUNK_TREE is available. Btrfs provides a small part of
the CHUNK_TREE in the superblock in a structure called the CHUNK_ARRAY. The CHUNK_ARRAY is
always located at offset 0x32B in the superblock. The size of the array is given at offset 0xA0 in the
Superblock and is 0x81 bytes (Table 11.18). The contents of the CHUNK_ARRAY are provided in Listing
11.8.

The CHUNK_ARRAY consists of (key, CHUNK_ITEM) pairs. Listing 11.8 begins with the 0x11 byte key
which is followed by the CHUNK_ITEM. Alternate fields in the CHUNK_ITEM are highlighted. The
processed key is shown in Table 11.19.
Table 11.19 Processed key from first CHUNK_ARRAY item.
Offset Size Description Value
0x00
0x08 Object ID
0x100 (
)
0x08
0x01 Type
0xE4 (CHUNK_ITEM)
0x09
0x08 Key Offset
0x1500000 (
)
The key offset for a CHUNK_ITEM is the logical address at which the address space begins, 0x1500000 in
this case. Analysis proceeds to process the CHUNK_ITEM which is shown in Table 11.20. From this it is
clear that there are two stripes in the CHUNK_ITEM. This means that any logical address that maps to this
chunk will be duplicated. There will be two physical addresses corresponding to one logical address. Table
11.21 shows the processed stripes.
Table 11.20 Processed CHUNK_ITEM found in the CHUNK_ARRAY.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x08 Size of Chunk (Bytes) 0x800000 (
)
0x08
0x08 Root Ref. Chunk
0x02 (
)
0x10
0x08 Stripe Length
0x10000 (
)
0x18
0x08 Type
0x22 (
)
0x20
0x04 Optimal I/O Align
0x10000 (
)
0x24
0x04 Optimal I/O Width
0x10000 (
)
0x28
0x04 Sector Size
0x1000 (
)
0x2C 0x02 Number of Stripes
0x02 (
)
0x2E
0x02 Sub Stripes
0x01 (
)
Table 11.21 Processed stripes from the CHUNK_ARRAY's CHUNK_ITEM.
Offset Size Description
Stripe 1
Stripe 2
0x00
0x08 Device ID
0x01 (
)
0x01 (
)
0x08
0x08 Offset
0x1500000
0x1D00000
(
) (
)
0x10
0x10 Device UUID 0x3644…1EEA
0x3644…1EEA

The CHUNK_ARRAY's CHUNK_ITEMs should contain the information needed to bootstrap the logical to
physical address mapping process, by allowing the CHUNK_TREE to be located.
11.2.4.3 Locate the CHUNK_TREE
Next the CHUNK_ITEM located in the CHUNK_ARRAY is used to discover the location of the
CHUNK_TREE. From the superblock the logical address of the CHUNK_TREE is 0x1504000. The
CHUNK_ITEM recovered from the CHUNK_ARRAY has a key offset of 0x1500000. This is less than or
equal to the desired logical address and as such the logical address must be part of this chunk. The
calculation outlined in Section 11.1.7 is performed for the case of one single device in the file system.
=
{Substitute Values }
=
{Calculate }
= 0x1504000
Therefore a copy of the CHUNK_TREE root node should be found at offset 0x1504000 and also, if the
second stripe was used, at offset 0x1D04000. Listing 11.9 shows the first 
 bytes at each location.
Clearly the checksum, FS UUID and logical addresses are all identical. Hence two copies of the
CHUNK_TREE root node have been discovered. The next step is to rebuild the entire CHUNK_TREE.
11.2.4.4 Process the CHUNK_TREE
In processing the CHUNK_TREE, either of the physical locations discovered in the previous step can be
used. Listing 11.10 shows an excerpt from the CHUNK_TREE root node at offset 0x1D04000.

All tree nodes begin with a node header. Generally what follows the header is of more interest than the
header itself. The number of items in the node shown in Listing 11.10 is 0x04 while the node is at level
0x00. A level 0 node is a leaf node and hence contains item pointers immediately after the node header, with
the item data appearing at the very end of the node. Alternate item pointers are underlined. Also it appears
that there are other item pointers after the four highlighted ones. Knowing that this device was zero'd before
file system creation, it is possible that these are items that are no longer in use from this node. Table 11.22
shows the live item pointer values.
Table 11.22 Processing of the four item pointers found in the CHUNK_TREE root node.
Offset Size Desc.
Item 1
Item 2
0x00
0x08 Object ID
0x01 (
)
0x100 (
)
0x08
0x01 Type
0xD8
0xE4
(DEV_ITEM)
(CHUNK_ITEM)
0x09
0x08 Key Offset 0x01
0xD00000
(
)
(
)
0x11
0x04 Data Offset 0x3F39
0x3EE9
(
)
(
)
0x15
0x04 Data Size
0x62 (
)
0x50 (
)
Offset Size Desc.
Item 3
Item 4
0x00
0x08 Object ID
0x100 (
)
0x100 (
)
0x08
0x01 Type
0xE4
0xE4
(CHUNK_ITEM) (CHUNK_ITEM)
0x09
0x08 Key Offset 0x1500000
0x1D00000
(
) (
)
0x11
0x04 Data Offset 0x3E79
0x3E09
(
)
(
)
0x15
0x04 Data Size
0x70 (
)
0x70 (
)

From the CHUNK_TREE item pointers (Table 11.22) it is seen that there is one DEV_ITEM (Type: 0xD8)
and three CHUNK_ITEMs (Type: 0xE4). This is to be expected, as there should be one DEV_ITEM per
device in the file system, and there is only a single device in this file system. Also there should be (at least)
a CHUNK_ITEM for the data, metadata and system block groups, so three is the minimum expected. Based
on the data size values for the CHUNK_ITEMs item 2 contains one stripe and items 3 and 4 contain two
stripes each. Based on the key offset, item 3 is most likely the CHUNK_ITEM that was contained in the
CHUNK_ARRAY.
Each of these items can now be processed. In order to extract the contents of each item four pieces of
information are required: the physical offset to the start of the node, the length of the node header, the offset
to the item data and the data size. For all of the items above, the physical offset to the node start is
0x1D04000 (or 0x1504000 depending on the stripe used) and the node header is always 0x65 bytes in size.
Each individual item pointer is then examined to determine the offset to the item's data (relative to the end
of the node header) and the size of that data. For instance the physical offset of the start of item 1's data is:
The size of this item is 0x62 bytes. The resulting DEV_ITEM is shown in Listing 11.11.
From Listing 11.11 it is clearly the correct file system as the FS UUID matches that found in the
superblock. The partial processing of this DEV_ITEM is shown in Table 11.23.
Table 11.23 Partially processed DEV_ITEM from the CHUNK_TREE.
Offset Size Description
Value
0x00
0x08 Device ID
0x01 (
)
0x08
0x08 # bytes on device 0x20000000
(
)
0x10
0x08 # bytes used
0x5800000
(
)
0x20
0x04 Sector size
0x1000 (
)
0x24
0x08 Type
0x00 (
)
0x42
0x10 Device UUID
0x3644…1EEA
0x52
0x10 FS UUID
0x2F72…7816
Once the DEV_ITEM has been processed the three CHUNK_ITEMs can be extracted. Listing 11.12 shows
the contents of all three CHUNK_ITEMs and the commands used to extract them.

Table 11.24 Partially processed CHUNK_ITEMs from the CHUNK_TREE root node.
Offset Size Desc.
CHUNK 1
CHUNK 2
CHUNK 3
0x00
0x08 Chunk
Size
0x800000 (
)
0x800000 (
) 0x2000000 (
)
0x18
0x08 Type
0x01 (
)
0x22 (
)
0x24 (
)
0x2C 0x02 # Stripes
0x01 (
)
0x02 (
)
0x02 (
)
0x2E
0x02 Sub
Stripes
0x01 (
)
0x01 (
)
0x01 (
)
Stripe 1
0x00
0x08 Device ID 0x01 (
)
0x01 (
)
0x01 (
)
0x08
0x08 Offset
0xD00000 (
)
0x1500000 (
)
0x2500000 (
)
Stripe 2
0x00
0x08 Device ID N/A
0x01 (
)
0x01 (
)
0x08
0x08 Offset
N/A
0x1D00000 (
)
0x4500000 (
)
Table 11.24 shows the processed CHUNK_ITEMs. The CHUNK_TREE can be used to map logical
addresses to physical addresses for the remaining structures in the file system.

11.2.4.5 Locate the Root Tree
At this stage the CHUNK_TREE has been obtained. The only other address available is that of the
ROOT_TREE. This logical address is 0x1D58000. The CHUNK_ITEM with the nearest (but less than or
equal to) key offset is CHUNK_ITEM 3 (Item 4 in the node) with key offset 0x1D00000. This contains two
stripes, one beginning at 0x2500000 and one at 0x4500000.
The difference between the logical address and the key offset is:
The root node of the ROOT_TREE should therefore be located at:
and
which are 0x2558000 and 0x4558000, respectively. 
 bytes is extracted from each of these locations in
Listing 11.13, in order to confirm that they are valid tree nodes.
From this we see that the nodes are identical (checksums match) and that they are both referring to the
correct file system (FS UUID) and represent the same logical address: 0x1D58000.
11.2.4.6 Locate the FS_TREE
The most interesting data structure in Btrfs for rebuilding the file system is the FS_TREE. In order to locate
the FS_TREE it is necessary to process the ROOT_TREE to determine the location of the FS_TREE. The
root tree's root node content is shown in Listing 11.14.


Table 11.25 Processed item pointers from the root node in Listing 11.14.
Data
Item 1
Item 2
Item 3
Item 4
OID
0x02 (
)
0x04 (
)
0x05 (
)
0x05 (
)
Type
0x84
0x84
0x0C
0x84
Key Offset 0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x06 (
)
0x00 (
)
Data Offset 0x3DE4
0x3C2D
0x3C1C
0x3A65
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
Data Size
0x1B7 (
) 0x1B7 (
) 0x11 (
)
0x1B7 (
)
Data
Item 5
Item 6
Item 7
Item 8
OID
0x06(
)
0x06 (
)
0x06 (
)
0x07 (
)
Type
0x01
0x0C
0x54
0x84
Key Offset 0x00 (
)
0x06 (
)
0x8DBFC2D2 0x00 (
)
Data Offset 0x39C5
0x39B9
0x3994
0x37DD
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
Data Size
0xA0 (
) 0x0C (
)
0x25 (
)
0x1B7 (
)
Data
Item 9
Item 10
OID
0x09 (
)
Type
0x84
0x84
Key Offset 0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
Data Offset 0x3626
0x346F
(
)
(
)
Data Size
0x1B7 (
) 0x1B7 (
)
The node header (Listing 11.14) shows there are 0xA items in this node and that it is a leaf node. Alternate
item pointers are highlighted. Processing of these is shown in Table 11.25.
The Object ID's in the keys show the trees for which information is present. In total there are seven distinct
OID's present. These OID's represent the following objects: EXTENT_TREE (0x02); DEV_TREE (0x04);
FS_TREE (0x05); ROOT_DIRECTORY (0x06); CSUM_TREE (0x07); UUID_TREE (0x09); and
DATA_RELOC (
)
Of the various trees present the one of most interest for forensic analysis is the FS_TREE6 which is OID
0x05. There are two items associated with 0x05, which are an INODE_REF (0x0C) and a ROOT_ITEM
(0x84). The ROOT_ITEM will contain the location of the tree. The contents of this are shown in Listing
11.15.
Highlighted is the logical address of the FS_TREE (0x1D48000). Converting this logical address to a
physical address gives two locations: 0x2548000 and 0x4548000. The first 
 bytes of each of these are
shown in Listing 11.16. As can be seen these are identical (checksum) and represent the correct logical
address (0x1D4C000).
As the FS_TREE has been located analysis continues by processing this tree. It is the processing of this tree
that allows all files to be listed.

11.2.4.7 Processing the FS_TREE
The method used to analyse the FS_TREE is identical to that used to analyse the ROOT_TREE (and also
the CHUNK_TREE). The common structure of all B‐Trees in Btrfs means that the node header is first
processed to determine the number of items and the node level (leaf or internal). If it is an internal node the
other nodes are located in the tree and processed. In the case of a leaf node the data items are located in the
node and each of these are processed. The contents of the FS_TREE's root node are given in Listing 11.17.
Note that the first 0x60 bytes have been removed.
It is clear this is a leaf node with 0x1A items present. Alternate items are highlighted. Table 11.26 shows the
interpretation of these items.
Table 11.26 Items discovered in the FS_TREE root node.
Data Item 1
Item 2
Item 3
Item 4
Item 5
Item 6
Item 7
Item 8 Item 9
OID 0x100
0x100
0x100
0x100
0x100
0x100
0x100
0x100
0x101
Type 0x01
0x0C
0x54
0x54
0x54
0x60
0x60
0x60
0x01
Key
Off.
0x00
0x100
0x33C3422A 0x409C1140 0x4DFAF554 0x02
0x03
0x04
0x00
Data
Off.
0x3EFB 0x3EEF
0x3ECA
0x3EA4
0x3E81
0x3E5E 0x3E38 0x3E13 0x3D73
Data
Size
0xA0
0x0C
0x25
0x26
0x23
0x23
0x26
0x25
0xA0
Data Item 10 Item 11
Item 12
Item 13
Item 14
Item 15 Item 16 Item
17
Item 18
OID 0x101
0x101
0x101
0x101
0x101
0x102
0x102
0x102
0x103
Type 0x0C
0x54
0x54
0x60
0x60
0x01
0x0C
0x6C
0x01
Key
Off.
0x100
0x1A9F0281 0x8C0E76C2 0x02
0x03
0x00
0x100
0x00
0x00
Data
Off.
0x3D64 0x3D3D
0x3D15
0x3CEE
0x3CC6
0x3C26 0x3C14 0x3B59 0x3AB9
Data
Size
0x0F
0x27
0x28
0x27
0x28
0xA0
0x12
0xBB
0xA0
Data Item 19 Item 20
Item 21
Item 22
Item 23
Item 24 Item 25 Item
26
OID 0x103
0x103
0x104
0x104
0x104
0x105
0x105
0x105
Type 0x0C
0x6C
0x01
0x0C
0x6C
0x01
0x0C
0x6C
Key
Off.
0x101
0x00
0x00
0x101
0x00
0x00
0x100
0x00
Data
Off.
0x3AA6 0x3A71
0x39D1
0x39BD
0x397C
0x38DC 0x38CB 0x3896
Data
Size
0x13
0x35
0xA0
0x14
0x41
0xA0
0x11
0x35
The FS_TREE contains information on all files/directories in the file system. From Table 11.26 there are six
distinct OIDs in the table. These have different item types associated with them. Table 11.27 summarises the
OIDs that have been discovered and the item types that are associated with each OID.

Table 11.27 OIDs and associated items in the FS_TREE.
OID
0x01
0x0C
0x54
0x60
0x6C
INODE INODE DIR
DIR
EXTENT
ITEM
REF
ITEM INDEX DATA
0x100 1
1
3
3
0x101 1
1
2
2
0x102 1
1
1
0x103 1
1
1
0x104 1
1
1
0x105 1
1
1
Previous knowledge of Btrfs item types implies that OIDs 0x100 and 0x101 are directories, as each contains
DIR_ITEM and DIR_INDEX items, while the remaining OIDs are files, as each of these contain
EXTENT_DATA items. All the items have INODE_ITEMs and INODE_REF items as both files and
directories must have metadata associated with them (INODE_ITEM) and a name (INODE_REF).
11.2.4.8 Process Directories
OIDs 0x100 and 0x101 appear to be directories as both have items of type 0x54 (DIR_ITEM) and 0x60
(DIR_INDEX). The root directory always has OID 0x100 and processing begins with this directory.
Initially its INODE_REF is processed in order to discover the name of the directory. The contents of the
INODE_REF item for OID 0x100 are shown in Listing 11.18.


From this the name is .. commonly used for the root directory. Notice that the key offset in this item (2)
shows the parent to be 0x100 – in other words the same directory. Next the DIR_ITEMs found in that OID
are processed. Items 3, 4 and 5 above are DIR_ITEMs in 0x100
. Their contents are shown in Listing 11.19.

Immediately what appear to be filenames (sea.jpg, info.txt and Files) are seen. These items are further
processed as shown in Table 11.28.
Table 11.28 Processing of DIR_ITEMs in the FS_TREE root node.
Offset Size Name
Item 3
Item 4
Item 5
0x00
0x11 Key
OID: 0x105 OID: 0x102 OID: 0x101
Type: 0x01
Type: 0x01
Type: 0x01
Offset: 0x00 Offset: 0x00 Offset: 0x00
0x11
0x08 Transid
0x09
0x07
0x07
0x19
0x02 Xattr Length
0x00
0x00
0x00
0x1B 0x02 Name Length (n) 0x07
0x08
0x05
0x1D 0x01 Entry Type
0x01
0x01
0x02
0x1E
(n)
File Name
sea.jpg
info.txt
Files
The entry type in Table 11.28 provides the type of file that the entry refers to. The possible values are: 0x00
= unknown; 0x01 = regular file; 0x02 = directory; 0x03 = character device; 0x04 = block device; 0x05 =

FIFO device; 0x06 = socket; and 0x07 = symbolic link. From Table 11.28 the root directory contains the
following objects:
OID: 0x101 (
); Directory; Files.
OID: 0x102 (
); Regular File; info.txt.
OID: 0x105 (
); Regular File; sea.jpg.
Recall the initial file listing performed after creating the device (Listing 11.5). Notice how the OIDs are
used as the inode number in Btrfs. In order to list the remaining files, the contents of each sub‐directory
must be processed. In this case there is only one sub‐directory, Files (OID: 0x101). This has two
DIR_ITEM items (11 and 12). The contents of these are shown in Listing 11.20.
Again the filenames are clearly visible in ASCII. Processing the DIR_ITEMs in their entirety is shown in
Table 11.29.
Table 11.29 Processing of DIR_ITEMs in the FS_TREE belonging to OID 0x101.
Offset Size Name
Item 11
Item 12
0x00
0x11 Key
OID: 0x103 OID: 0x104
Type: 0x01
Type: 0x01
Offset: 0x00 Offset: 0x00
0x11
0x08 Transid
0x08
0x08
0x19
0x02 Xattr Length
0x00
0x00
0x1B 0x02 Name Length (n) 0x09
0x0A
0x1D 0x01 Entry Type
0x01
0x01
0x1E
(n)
File name
river.jpg
delete.txt
This results in two files:
OID: 0x103 (
); Regular File; river.jpg.
OID: 0x104 (
); Regular File; delete.txt.
This process continues for any further directories discovered (there are none in this case) allowing all files
to be listed.
11.2.4.9 Recovering Metadata
The next step in the process is to recover the metadata for a particular file or directory. This section
examines sea.jpg (OID: 0x105) and attempts to recover metadata for this file. The INODE_ITEM for this
file is item 24 (Table 11.26), the contents of which are provided in Listing 11.21. The processed
INODE_ITEM appears in Table 11.30.

Table 11.30 Partially processed INODE_ITEM for OID 0x105 (sea.jpg).
Offset Size Description
Value
0x00
0x08 Generation
0x09 (
)
0x08
0x08 TransID
0x09 (
)
0x10
0x08 Size (actual)
0x47EE4 (
)
0x18
0x08 Size (allocated) 0x48000 (
)
0x28
0x04 # links
0x01 (
)
0x34
0x04 Mode
0x81E8
Regular File: ‐rwxr‐x‐‐‐
0x70
0x0C Access time
Seconds: 0x6555FDAB
2023‐11‐16 11:31:55 UTC
Nanoseconds: 0x30286349
0x7C 0x0C Change time
Seconds: 0x6555FDAB
2023‐11‐16 11:31:55 UTC
Nanoseconds: 0x30286349
0x88
0x0C Modified time
Seconds: 0x6555FDAB
2023‐11‐16 11:31:55 UTC
Nanoseconds: 0x30286349
0x94
0x0C Created time
Seconds: 0x6555FDAB
2023‐11‐16 11:31:55 UTC
Nanoseconds: 0x30286349
The INODE_ITEM data shows information that is very similar to that found in ext. This is normal for
Linux/Unix‐based file systems as they all attempt to 'play nicely' with the stat command.
11.2.4.10 Recovering File Contents
The final step in processing a file in file system forensic analysis is to recover the actual contents of the file.
In Btrfs file contents are stored either inline or in extents. Due to this, this section will recover the contents
of two files, one inline and one stored in extents. Regardless of how the file contents are actually stored the
information about the file content is stored in the EXTENT_DATA (0x6C) item. The two files chosen are
delete.txt (OID: 0x104) and sea.jpg (OID: 0x105). The EXTENT_DATA item for Object 0x104 is item 23
(Table 11.26). The data contents of this item are shown in Listing 11.22. The complete processing of this
data is shown in Table 11.31. The actual content is clearly visible in the EXTENT_DATA item.

Table 11.31 Processed EXTENT_DATA for OID 0x104.
Offset Size Description
Value
0x00
0x08 Generation
0x09 (
)
0x08
0x08 Decoded extent size 0x2C (
)
0x10
0x01 Compression
0x00 – none
0x11
0x01 Encryption
0x00 – none
0x12
0x02 Other encoding
0x00 – none
0x14
0x01 Type
0x00 – inline
The key information first required from the EXTENT_DATA is how the data is stored. This is given by the
type field in Table 11.31. For OID 0x104 the value for this field is 0x00, meaning the data is stored inline.
In the case of inline data the size of the decoded data field informs how many content bytes are in the file
(as long as no compression/encryption is being used). In this case, this value is 0x2C bytes meaning that the
0x2C bytes immediately following the EXTENT_DATA contain the actual file content. The contents in this
case are: ‘This file will be deleted at a later stage.∖n’.
Moving to the next file, sea.jpg (OID: 0x105), the next task is to locate its content. The EXTENT_DATA
for this file is contained in item 26. The contents of this item are shown in Listing 11.23.
The type of this EXTENT_DATA is 0x01, meaning that it is regular, in other words the contents are not
stored inline but are contained in extent structures. The next 0x20 bytes contain information about the actual
extent itself.7 The processed values are shown in Table 11.32.
Table 11.32 The extent structure for the EXTENT_DATA item in OID 0x105.
Offset Size Description
Value
0x15
0x08 Logical address of extent
0xD30000 (
)
0x1D 0x08 Size of extent
0x48000 (
)
0x25
0x08 Offset within the extent
0x00
0x2D 0x08 Logical number of bytes in file 0x48000 (
)
The logical address (
) can be translated to a physical address using the CHUNK_TREE. The key offset
for CHUNK_ITEM 1 is 0xD00000 (
), and the stripe for CHUNK_ITEM 1 is 0xD00000. Performing

the calculation:
The file size given in the EXTENT_DATA is the actual number of bytes allocated on the device, in this case
0x48000. However, the INODE_ITEM file size value was 0x47EE4 (it also listed the allocated size in bytes
as 0x48000). Extracting 0x47EE4 bytes from 0xD30000 should provide the file contents as shown in
Listing 11.24.
The recovered picture is shown in Figure 11.3. The steps outlined in this section should be repeatable so the
reader can now recover the files info.txt and river.jpg from the file system.

Figure 11.3 The recovered sea.jpg file.
11.3 Btrfs Advanced Analysis
The file system that has been analysed is very simple. There are only a small number of files in the file
system and there is very little historical data as this file system was created solely for the purposes of
demonstrating basic file system forensics in Btrfs. In this section some advanced concepts present in Btrfs
are examined. These topics include deleted files, internal nodes, simple RAID devices (RAID 1 – mirroring)
and subvolumes and snapshots.
11.3.1 File Deletion
What happens when a file is deleted in Btrfs? In BtrFS_V2.E01 there are two deleted files. In
BtrFS_V1.E01 the contents of OID 0x103 are located at 0xD00000. Listing 11.25 shows the contents at
this point in both BtrFS_V1.E01 (before deletion) and BtrFS_V2.E01 (after deletion). From this the
contents are identical both before and after deletion.
The content of the file is still present but can it be recovered? To determine if it can be recovered processing
of the file system (BtrFS_V2.E01) begins as it did previously. The first step is to process the superblock to
determine the logical address of the ROOT_TREE and the CHUNK_TREE. The relevant information is
highlighted in Listing 11.26.

The CHUNK_TREE address is the same as it was previously but the address of the ROOT_TREE has
changed. The next step is to rebuild the CHUNK_TREE by processing the CHUNK_ARRAY and then
locating the root of the CHUNK_TREE. The CHUNK_ARRAY is located at offset 0x32B and is 0x81 bytes
in size (found at offset 0xA0 in the superblock). The contents of the CHUNK_ARRAY are shown in Listing
11.27.
From this it is clear that there are two stripes with a key offset of 0x1500000, the stripes begin at
0x1500000 and 0x1D00000, meaning that the CHUNK_TREE itself can be found at the physical offsets
0x1504000 and 0x1D04000. The contents of these locations are shown in Listing 11.28.
Rebuilding the CHUNK_TREE leads to three chunks with a total of five stripes. This is shown in Table
11.33.

Table 11.33 Excerpts from the CHUNK_ITEMS in BtrFS_V2.E01. These excerpts provide sufficient
information to map logical to physical addresses.
Field
CHUNK 1
CHUNK 2
CHUNK 3
OID
0x100 (
)
0x100 (
)
0x100 (
)
Type
0xE4
0xE4
0xE4
Key Offset 0x0xD00000
0x1500000
0x1D00000
(
)
(
)
(
)
Data Offset 0x3EE9 (
) 0x3E79 (
) 0x3E09 (
)
Data Size
0x50 (
)
0x70 (
)
0x70 (
)
# Stripes
0x01 (
)
0x02 (
)
0x02 (
)
Stripe 1
0xD00000
0x1500000
0x2500000
Offset
(
)
(
)
(
)
Stripe 2
N/A
0x1D00000
0x4500000
Offset
(
)
(
)
The next step is to locate the ROOT_TREE. The logical address of this is 0x1D2C000. Converting this to a
physical address using the CHUNK_TREE (Table 11.33), gives two options: 0x252C000 or 0x452C000.
The contents of these locations are shown in Listing 11.29, showing the same structure in both locations.
The OID for the FS_TREE is 0x05 and the ROOT_ITEM type is 0x84. Processing this item for the
ROOT_TREE shows the logical address of the FS_TREE is 0x1D10000. This corresponds to the physical
addresses: 0x2510000 and 0x4510000. When these locations are processed it is seen that there are only
 items in the FS_TREE, compared to 
 items that were there previously (Table 11.26). There is no
mention of items 0x103 and 0x104 in the current version of FS_TREE, these being the two items that were
deleted. Hence the means of recovering the underlying data through the file system appears to be
impossible.8
There is one way of recovering certain older file system information from Btrfs. This involves another area
of the superblock called the super roots backup area. This area begins at offset 0xB2B and consists of
0x2A0 bytes. The area contains four btrfs_root_backup items the structure of which is shown in Table
11.34. Note that only the first 0x50 bytes of this structure are shown.

Table 11.34 btrfs_root_backup structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x08 Root Tree
The logical address of the root tree backup.
0x08
0x08 Root Tree Gen
The generation of the root tree backup.
0x10
0x08 Chunk Tree
The logical address of the chunk tree backup.
0x18
0x08 Chunk Tree Gen The generation of the chunk tree backup.
0x20
0x08 Extent Tree
The logical address of the extent tree backup.
0x28
0x08 Extent Tree Gen The generation of the extent tree backup.
0x30
0x08 FS Tree
The logical address of the FS tree backup.
0x38
0x08 FS Tree Gen
The generation of the FS tree backup.
0x40
0x08 Dev Tree
The logical address of the dev tree backup.
0x48
0x08 Dev Tree Gen
The generation of the dev tree backup.
Each btrfs_root_backup is 0xA8 bytes in size (0x2A0/0x4). Listing 11.30 shows the second of these
structures in the superblock from BtrFS_V2.E01.
In order to confirm the tree that resides at each location, the node header can be processed. Each tree node
contains the ID of the tree that owns the node. This is also included in Table 11.35.
Table 11.35 Logical and physical addresses from the second backup root structure.
Log. Addr. Generation Phys. Addr. Tree OID
0x1D58000 0x0A
0x2558000 0x01 (ROOT_TREE)
0x1504000 0x05
0x1504000 0x03 (CHUNK_TREE)
0x1D5C000 0x0A
0x255C000 0x02 (EXTENT_TREE)
0x1D48000 0x09
0x2548000 0x05 (FS_TREE)
0x1D28000 0x06
0x2528000 0x04 (DEV_TREE)
From Table 11.35 it is clear that there are older versions of a number of trees, including an older version of
the FS_TREE (Generation 0x09). This is located at offset 0x2548000. The node header for this is shown in
Listing 11.31. The checksum for this node is highlighted. This can be compared to that found in the original
FS_TREE root node (Listing 11.16). As these values are equal the node contents are equal. This means that
the contents of both deleted files can be recovered from this backup structure.

This system of backups means that not much historical information is available through the file system but
the information that is available is protected. While one of these backup trees links to the content of the file,
the content will never be overwritten.
11.3.2 Analysis of Internal Nodes
The file system in BtrFS_V3.E01 contains over 
 files. These are merely a collection of small text
files but the sheer number of files is too large to be stored in one single FS_TREE node. Hence, internal
nodes are required with pointers to other nodes. The physical address of the FS_TREE in this file system is
0x2528000. An excerpt from this node is shown in Listing 11.32.
From Listing 11.32 it is clear that there are 0x1C items in this node and that the level is 1. Level 1 indicates
that this is an internal node and as such the internal node structure (Figure 11.2 and Table 11.5) is required
to process it. The processing of the first three elements in this node is shown in Table 11.36.
Table 11.36 Values for the first three pointers in the FS_TREE root node.
Pointer 1
Pointer 2
Pointer 3
OID
0x100
0x106
0x106
Type
0x01
0x54
0x54
Key Offset
0x00
0x32DEAC75 0x5EA31496
Block Number 0x1D24000 0x1D7C000
0x1D58000
Generation
0x0F
0x0F
0x0F

Each of the logical addresses discovered in the node is then translated to physical addresses and these are
processed. In this case, each of these is a leaf node containing items. For instance the logical address of the
first pointer is 0x1D24000. Mapping this to a physical address gives 0x2524000. At that offset a leaf node is
found.
In the type field for the internal node pointer, the type appears to refer to the type of the first item on the
subsequent page. For the three pointers presented in Table 11.36, the first item at the first pointer is type
0x01 and for the remaining two pointers, the first item in these nodes is type 0x54.
11.3.3 Multiple Device Configuration
One of the most exciting features of Btrfs is that RAID is built‐in. The desired RAID level can be specified
at creation. For the purposes of analysis a RAID 1 (mirrored) solution has been chosen. The creation of this
is shown in Listing 11.33.
Btrfs RAID file systems can be mounted by providing any member device to the mount command. For
instance, the file system created in Listing 11.33 could be mounted using the command mount /dev/sdc1
mnt/. When this file system is mounted the size is 'only' 256 M as seen in the output from df provided in
Listing 11.34.
Notice that the size of this volume is given as 256 M, half the actual size used. This is due to the mirroring
that RAID 1 introduces. The 512 M results in 256 M that is mirrored on both devices.
In order to analyse a single device file system the superblock is the starting point. It is the same for a multi‐
device file system but where is the superblock? On a single device file system the superblock is located at
0x10000 on the physical device, with backup copies throughout. On a multiple device RAID system the

superblock (and copies) are located on every device. Hence we can examine the superblock on any of the
devices. However, the superblocks are slightly different on each device as a superblock contains a
DEV_ITEM structure for the device on which it resides. At the very least the device UUID in this will be
different on different superblocks. Listing 11.35 shows an excerpt from the superblock of
BtrFS_Raid1_D1.E01.
Listing 11.35 shows two devices in the file system and also the logical address of both the ROOT_TREE
and the CHUNK_TREE. The file system UUID field can be used to confirm that the second device is part
of the same file system. This UUID should match for all devices in the file system.
Step 2 in the analysis is to process the CHUNK_ARRAY. This is located at 0x32B in the superblock and in
the above example is 0x81 bytes in size. The contents of this are provided in Listing 11.36 (the key is
highlighted), while the remaining data is the CHUNK_ITEM itself. From the CHUNK_ITEM there are two
stripes present in the item. The processed stripe values for this CHUNK_ITEM are shown in Table 11.37.

Table 11.37 Processed stripes from superblock CHUNK_ARRAY.
Stripe 1
Stripe 2
Device ID
0x01 (
)
0x02 (
)
Offset
0x1500000
0x100000
(
) (
)
Device UUID 0x19A1…4B86
0x3E05…CC93
Notice firstly that the two stripes are on different disks! Remember with RAID1 all data should be mirrored
on both devices. However, the starting physical offset is different on both devices. We need to determine
which device we are examining in order to know which stripe to use. Again, for bootstrapping purposes the
superblock contains a DEV_ITEM structure relating to the device. This is located at 0xC9 and occupies
0x62 bytes. The content of this, from both devices in the RAID array, is shown in Listing 11.37. The values
from these DEV_ITEMS are shown in Table 11.38.
Table 11.38 Partially processed DEV_ITEMs from both superblocks.
Offset Size Description
Device 1
Device 2
0x00
0x08 Device ID
0x01 (
)
0x02 (
)
0x08
0x08 Total number of bytes 0x10000000
0x10000000
(
) (
)
0x10
0x08 Number of used bytes 0x6800000
0x6800000
(
) (
)
0x42
0x10 Device UUID
0x19A1…4B86
0x3E05…CC93
0x52
0x10 File system UUID
0x0876..3B3A
0x0876..3B3A
The physical offset of the CHUNK_TREE in each disk can now be calculated. The logical address is
0x1504000, which is part of the recovered CHUNK (key offset: 0x1500000). Below the calculations for
both stripes (i.e. both devices) are shown.

Device 1 (offset: 0x1500000) Device 2 (offset: 0x100000)
0x4000 + 0x1500000
0x4000 + 0x100000
=
=
0x1504000
0x104000
From the above result the CHUNK_TREE should be located at 0x1504000 on Device 1 and at 0x104000 on
Device 2. Excerpts from these locations are provided in Listing 11.38.
It is now possible to rebuild the entire CHUNK_TREE structure. The CHUNK_TREE root node contains
five items, two DEV_ITEMs (for the two devices in the file system) and three CHUNK_ITEMS. The
CHUNK_ITEMS are provided in Listing 11.39 and processed in Table 11.39. The key offset is included
with each one in Table 11.39.
Table 11.39 The processed CHUNK_TREE for the RAID 1 file system.
CHUNK 1
CHUNK 2
CHUNK 3
Key Offset
0x1500000
0x1D00000
0x3D00000
(
) (
) (
)
# Stripes
0x02 (
)
0x02 (
)
0x02 (
)
Stripe 1
Device ID
0x01 (
)
0x01 (
)
0x01 (
)
Offset
0x1500000
0x1D00000
0x3D00000
(
) (
) (
)
Device UUID
0x19A1…4B86
Stripe 2
Device ID
0x02 (
)
0x02 (
)
0x02 (
)
Offset
0x100000
0x900000
0x2900000
(
)
(
)
(
)
Device UUID
0x3E05…CC93
Once the CHUNK_TREE is available, the remainder of the file system is processed normally, remembering
to ensure that the correct device is being examined.
11.3.4 Subvolumes and Snapshots
Btrfs allows for the creation of subvolumes, separate file systems that are formed from part or all of the file
system. By default every Btrfs file system has one subvolume, which is called default

and is referenced by FS_TREE. Subvolumes can be mounted independently and with different options.
Btrfs also supports a special type of subvolume called a snapshot. Snapshots are created for a particular
subvolume and record the state of that volume at a particular moment in time. Snapshots begin as references
to existing trees but may be changed at a later point in time (unless created as read‐only). In this section a
subvolume and a snapshot are created on a Btrfs device and these are then analysed.
The image BtrFS_V4.E01 consists of a number of files/directories. This file system also contains a sub‐
volume (sub1) and a snapshot of this subvolume (sub1‐snap). After creating the snapshot some of the files
in the subvolume were modified/deleted. However, from the snapshot it is still possible to recover these.
Listing 11.40 contains the commands to create the subvolume. These commands must be executed in the

root directory of the mounted Btrfs file system. After creating the subvolume a number of files were added
to both the default and newly created sub‐volumes. A snapshot of sub1 was then taken. The command to
perform this task is given in Listing 11.41. Note that it is necessary to again execute this command from the
root folder of the mounted file system.
Mounting the file system normally and listing files is shown in Listing 11.42. From this the subvolume and
snapshot are listed also. Note that the files in the subvolume (sub1) were deleted after this listing was
created.
The subvolume can also be mounted independently as shown in Listing 11.43 (before trying this ensure the
default subvolume has been unmounted).
The file BtrFS_V4.E01 contains the image of the above setup. Locating the CHUNK_TREE in this allows
the ROOT_TREE's physical address to be determined as 0x252C000. Examining that node in detail shows

the expected items for the expected trees, but in addition it shows two items related to OID 0x100 and two
for OID 0x101. In each case a ROOT_ITEM (0x84) and a ROOT_BACKREF (0x90) item are found. The
ROOT_BACKREF contents for OID 0x100 are shown in Listing 11.44.
From Listing 11.44 the name of the subvolume is evident. The complete processing of this item is shown in
Table 11.40. Note the key offset contains the tree ID of the parent containing this tree. In this case this is
0x05, meaning that this is a child of the default FS_TREE.
Table 11.40 Values discovered in the ROOT_BACKREF item for sub1.
Offset Size Description
Value
0x00
0x08 Directory ID of the directory in the containing tree where this tree
occurs
0x100 (
) root
dir.
0x08
0x08 Sequence (index in the directory tree)
0x03 (
)
0x10
0x02 Size of name (n)
0x04 (
)
0x12
(n)
Name
sub1
The ROOT_ITEM for subvolumes can be processed to find the location of the root of the subvolume's file
tree. This tree can then be processed in the same way that FS_TREE can be processed. Snapshots are
processed in an identical manner. It is left as an exercise for the reader to process the snapshot and locate
the deleted files (river.jpg and delete.txt).
11.4 Summary
This chapter introduced one of the many file systems available for the Linux operating system. Btrfs is seen
as a viable replacement for the ext family of file systems in the Linux world and has become the default file
system on some distributions. As such it is expected that it will be more frequently encountered over the
coming years.
Btrfs is considered a modern file system and it provides much functionality which was not available in the
ext family. This includes the use of copy‐on‐write (CoW) for updating content which leads to greater
reliability, along with modern features such as pooling (e.g. RAID), snapshots and checksums. As with
many modern file systems Btrfs uses a B‐Tree structure for most storage, with almost everything
represented as a tree structure. The only exception to this is the superblock structure which is not stored as a
B‐Tree.
Btrfs allows for snapshots and subvolumes which have some interesting forensic implications. The copy‐on‐
write principle underlying the file system means that there is always the possibility of recovering older
versions of the Btrfs file system structures.
Currently there are few tools which offer support for file system forensic analysis of Btrfs. With its growing
popularity this may change in the near future but for now manual analysis of this file system is essential.
Exercises
For these exercises the file system in BtrFS_V4.E01 is used.
1. There is a file in the default subvolume called sea.jpg (OID: 
). Recover this file.

2. In relation to the file sea.jpg (OID: 
) in the default subvolume answer the following questions:
a. When was this file created?
b. What size is the file?
c. What are the file's permissions?
3. List all files in the subvolume's snapshot.
4. A file called river.jpg (OID: 
) (MD5: 15ebaf1a1f34c57c8e89fae341cef8cd) was deleted from
the subvolume. Recover this file using any valid means.
For the remaining exercises Mirrored RAID file system (BtrFS‐Raid1‐D1.E01 and BtrFS‐Raid1‐
D2.E01) is used.
5. What are the UUIDs for each individual device present in the RAID 1 array?
6. At what byte offset on both devices can the contents of sea.jpg (OID: 
) be found?
7. In relation to info2.txt (OID: 
) answer the following questions:
a. When was the file created?
b. What is the allocated file size?
c. Are the file's contents stored resident or non‐resident?
d. What are the file's permissions?
8. List the contents of the Files (OID: 
) directory.
Bibliography
Bhat, W.A. and Wani, M.A. (2018). Forensic analysis of B‐tree file system (Btrfs). Digital Investigation 27:
57–70.
BTRFS (2024a). BTRFS documentation [Internet]. btrfs.readthedocs.io. [cited 2024 April 2].
https://btrfs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ (accessed 14 August 2024).
BTRFS (2024b). Data Structures ‐ Btrfs Wiki [Internet]. a rchive.kernel.org. [cited 2024 April 2].
https://archive.kernel.org/oldwiki/btrfs.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Data/Structures.html
BTRFS (2024c). On‐disk Format ‐ BTRFS documentation [Internet]. btrfs.readthedocs.io [cited 2024 April
2]. https://btrfs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/dev/On-disk-format.html (accessed 14 August 2024).
Hartmann, A. (2022a). Working with Btrfs –General Concepts [Internet]. Fedora Magazine 2022 [cited
2024 Apr 2]. https://fedoramagazine.org/working-with-btrfs-general-concepts/ (accessed 14 August
2024).
Hartmann, A. (2022b). Working with Btrfs ‐ Subvolumes [Internet]. Fedora Magazine 2022 [cited 2024
April 2]. https://fedoramagazine.org/working-with-btrfs-subvolumes/ (accessed 14 August 2024).
Hilgert, J.N., Lambertz, M., and Yang, S. (2018). Forensic analysis of multiple device BTRFS
configurations using The Sleuth Kit. Digital Investigation 26: S21–S29.
Juch, A. (2014). Btrfs filesystem forensics. Dissertation. Technische Universität Wien.
https://doi.org/10.34726/hss.2014.24504.
Kára, J. (2009). Ext4, btrfs, and the others. Proceeding of Linux‐Kongress and OpenSolaris Developer
Conference, pp. 99–111.

Mason, C. (2007). The Btrfs Filesystem, September 2007 [Internet]. [cited 2024 April 2].
https://giis.co.in/btrfs.pdf (accessed 14 August 2024).
Rodeh, O., Bacik, J., and Mason, C. (2013). BTRFS. ACM Transactions on Storage 9 (3): 1–32.
Son, D. (2018). btrForensics: Forensic Analysis Tool for Btrfs File System [Internet]. Penetration Testing
[cited 2024 April 2]. https://securityonline.info/btrforensics/ (accessed 19 December 2024).
SUSE (2024). Storage Administration Guide –SLES 15 SP5 [Internet]. documentation.suse.com. [cited
2024 April 3]. https://documentation.suse.com/sles/15-SP5/html/SLES-all/book-storage.html (accessed
14 August 2024).
The Linux Kernel (n.d.). BTRFS ‐ The Linux Kernel documentation [Internet]. docs.kernel.org.
https://docs.kernel.org/filesystems/btrfs.html (accessed 14 August 2024).
Wani, M.A. and Bhat, W.A. (2018). Dataset for forensic analysis of B‐tree file system. Data in Brief 18:
2013–2018.
Notes
1 The exception is when Btrfs is installed on solid‐state drives. In this case, the default behaviour is to have
no duplication of any chunk area.
2 Extent‐based storage is used in the ext4 file system.
3 Every object (trees, files, etc.) in Btrfs has a unique object ID number. System objects have numbers
between 0x01 and 0x100. OIDs greater than 0x100 are used by user‐created files. There are also certain
trees which have negative OIDs.
4 https://btrfs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
5 Due to the implementation of file system‐level RAID in Btrfs, it is possible for a single logical address to
map to multiple physical addresses. Each of these addresses will contain identical content.
6 Processing the ROOT_DIRECTORY would also point to the FS_TREE.
7 In the case of fragmented files there will be multiple EXTENT_DATA items each of which contains one
single extent. The offset within the extent in the EXTENT_DATA structure indicates the position in the
file content represented by this extent.
8 Be aware that as long as the data is still present, as it is by default in Btrfs, it is still possible that data
carving will be able to recover some or all of the deleted files.
OceanofPDF.com

Part IV
Apple File Systems
OceanofPDF.com

12
The HFS+ File System
For many years the Hierarchical File System (HFS) was the default on
Apple systems. This file system utilised 
‐bit addressing and as such
was not suitable for the developments that occurred in storage technology,
in particular the increased capacity that was available in newer storage
devices. This led to the development of HFS+ which uses 
‐bit
addressing to cater for larger storage capacities. The HFS+ file system was
introduced in 1998 and was the default file system on Apple devices for
almost 20 years. In 2017, the HFS+ file system was replaced with APFS
(Chapter 13).
The HFS+ file system is a journaled file system. All metadata operations are
first written to a journal before being committed to disk. The journal
provides a means of gathering more information about the file system than
is present in the main body of the file system. As with many modern file
systems, HFS+ storage is based on B‐Trees. Table 12.1 shows some of the
more common limits of the HFS+ file system.
One interesting point to note in relation to the analysis of HFS+ is that most
data is stored in a big‐endian format. This is similar to XFS (Chapter 10),
but unlike the vast majority of file systems in common usage. Data in HFS+
is located through extents (similar to data runs in NTFS and extents in
ext4).
Table 12.1 HFS+ file system limits.
Limit
Value
Max. Filename
255 unicode characters
Max. Volume Size 8 EiB
Max. File Size
8 EiB
Max. # Files

Files are listed in the catalog file in which each file has a unique catalog
node ID (CNID).1 This is an identifying number that is incremented with
each new file that is created. Once the supply of CNID values has been
exhausted, then and only then is a CNID reused. This means that up to that
point the CNID provides the order in which the files were created in the file
system.2
The basic storage unit in HFS+ is referred to as the allocation block.
Generally an allocation block is composed of a number of sectors. Sectors
are generally 
 bytes in size, although occasionally other sizes are
encountered. The standard allocation block size is usually 
 bytes in
size but this should be confirmed in the volume header. Allocation block
numbering begins at 
 and is used for logical addressing in HFS+.
12.1 On‐Disk Structures
In this section some of the more important structures in the HFS+ file
system are introduced. Knowledge of these structures is essential in order to
fully understand the HFS+ file system and also for manual processing.
These structures include:
Volume Header: The volume header structure is similar in purpose to
the superblocks found in Linux file systems and the volume boot
records found in Windows file systems. It contains general information
about the file system as a whole and allows other structures to be
located.
Catalog File: The catalog file contains information about all of the
files/directories on the file system. It allows file content to be located
and also provides all metadata related to every file. The catalog file's
purpose is identical to that of the master file table (MFT) in the NTFS
file system.
Extents Overflow File: HFS+ uses extents to locate file content. The
catalog file contains a number of extents, but in the case of heavily
fragmented files the additional extents are found in the extents
overflow file. This file is required only if there are more than 
extents needed to locate the file content.

Allocation File: The allocation file contains information about the
allocation status of each allocation block in the file system. It acts as a
bitmap structure for the HFS+ file system.
Attributes File: The attributes file is used to implement named forks.
These allow for names to be associated with data, allowing for named
attributes to be stored in this file.
Table 12.2 shows the reserved CNID values, each of which represents a
special metadata file in HFS+. These include the files listed above, along
with other files less commonly needed in digital forensics.
Table 12.2 HFS+ reserved CNIDs.
CNID Purpose
1
Root directory parent.
2
Root directory.
3
Extents overflow.
4
Catalog file.
5
Bad block file.
6
Allocation file.
7
Startup file.
8
Attributes file.
14
Repair catalog file.
15
Bogus extent file.
16
First user Catalog node. Usually journal.
The above structures are described in this section along with some other
structures that are required in order to effectively analyse HFS+. These
structures include forks, which allow data to be located in the file system,
B‐Trees which are used as the basic storage mechanism and the timestamp
structure employed in HFS+. As HFS+ is a journaled file system, this
section also introduces the journal structure.

12.1.1 Forks
HFS+ uses forks to store file data. Generally there are two types of fork
available in HFS+, the data fork and the resource fork. Data forks are used
to locate the actual content of the file, while a resource fork is used to store
structured data related to the file's content. This might include icons,
application code, etc. While there are standard resource fork types defined
(such as for sounds, images and window definitions) it is possible to create
a resource fork with any type of content (and provide it with any desired
four‐byte identifier).
The fork is an 
‐byte structure shown in Table 12.3. Forks are generally
found in the catalog file and in the volume header. The purpose of the fork
is to locate the file's content, hence their presence in the catalog file. In the
volume header, forks are used to locate the system files (including the
Catalog file).
Table 12.3 HFS+ fork structure.
Offset Size
Name
Description
0x00
0x08 Logical
Size
Size in bytes of the fork contents.
0x08
0x04 Clump
Size
When encountered in the fork this overwrites the
default clump size in the volume header.
0x0C 0x04 Total
Blocks
The total number of allocation blocks used by the
contents of this fork.
0x10
0x08
 8
Extents This contains an array of 
 extent descriptors.
The structure of extent descriptors is shown in
Table 12.4. In the case of a file requiring more than
 extent descriptors, these are stored in the
extents overflow file.
Table 12.4 HFS+ extent descriptor structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Starting Block The first allocation block in the extent.
0x04
0x04 # Blocks
The number of allocation blocks in the extent.

12.1.2 Time in HFS+
As always, time is a fundamental concept which must be understood in
order to effectively analyse any file system. HFS+ stores a number of time
values, both at a volume level (in the volume header structure) and also at
the file/folder level (in the catalog file). The default date format in HFS+ is
a 
 bit unsigned integer which represents the number of seconds since 1
January 1904. The HFS+ date value is stored in GMT.3 The maximum
representable date is 6 February 2040 at 06:28:15 GMT.
The easiest method to convert HFS+ time to a human‐readable format is to
first convert it to a Unix time. This is achieved by subtracting the number of
seconds between 1 January 1970 and 1 January 1904 (2,082,844,
)
from the HFS+ time. An example of this is shown in Listing 12.1 in which
the HFS+ time value of 0xE17279B7 is shown.
12.1.3 Volume Header
The volume header is the first structure that is processed during analysis. It
contains information about the file system as a whole and allows the
location of other vital metadata components to be discovered. The HFS+
volume begins with 
 bytes of (generally) empty space. The volume
header is found immediately after this. The structure is of such great
importance to the HFS+ file system that a copy of the structure is
maintained at the end of the file system. This is found in 
 bytes
before the end of the file system. Tables 12.5 and 12.7 provide the structure
of the volume header.

Table 12.5 HFS+ volume header structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Signature
This value is either H+ or HX.
0x02
0x02 Version
File system version number. If the signature
is H+ this is 
. If the signature is HX this
is 
.
0x04
0x04 Attributes
File‐system‐specific attributes (Table 12.6).
0x08
0x04 Last Mounted
Version
Generally one of 8.10 (OS8.1 ‐ 9.2.2), 10.0
in OS‐X or HFSJ for Journaled file systems.
0x0C 0x04 Journal info blk Block number of the journal information
block.
0x10
0x04 Creation date
File system creation time (HFS+ time – 
Section 12.1.2).
0x14
0x04 Modification
date
File system last modification time.
0x18
0x04 Backup date
File system last backup time.
0x1C 0x04 Checked date
File system last checked time.
0x20
0x04 File Count
Total number of files (ex. special files).
0x24
0x04 Folder count
Total number of folders excluding root.
0x28
0x04 Block size
The size of the allocation block in bytes.
0x2C 0x04 # Blocks
Total number of allocation blocks.
0x30
0x04 # Free Blocks
Number of free allocation blocks.
0x34
0x04 Next allocation Next free allocation block.
0x38
0x04 Resource clump
size
Clumps are groups of allocation blocks
which are sometimes allocated to a file to
avoid fragmentation.
0x3C 0x04 Data clump size As previous but for data forks.
0x40
0x04 Next CNID
The next free CNID.
The volume header contains much of the information that is found using
forensic tools such as fsstat. For instance one of the most important pieces

of information contained in this structure is that of allocation block size. All
addressing in HFS+ is performed through allocation block number making
this value vital for all subsequent analysis. The volume header also provides
information on the size of the file system (again in allocation blocks) and
the number of blocks that are currently free. In addition to this information
about the total number of files and directories in the file system is also
provided. Similar to the ext family of file systems the volume header
provides a number of time values including the creation date of the file
system. This creation time is the only time in HFS+ that is stored in local
time rather than UTC.
Table 12.6 HFS+ volume header attribute bit field values.
Bit
Value
Description
0–7 Reserved
Reserved.
8
Unmounted
Correctly
Set if the volume was correctly unmounted. This
should be the opposite of the inconsistent volume bit.
9
Bad Blocks
Set if there is an entry in the extents overflow file for
bad blocks.
10
No Caching
Set if blocks should not be cached.
11
Inconsistent
Volume
Set while the volume is mounted for writing and
should be unset when a volume is unmounted. If set
prior to mounting a consistency check should be
performed.
12
CNID Reused If set the last CNID has been used meaning older
CNIDs can be reused.
13
Volume
Journal
If set the volume has a journal.
14
Reserved
Reserved.
15
Write
Protected
Set if the volume is write protected due to a software
setting.
16–
31
Reserved
Reserved.

Table 12.7 HFS+ volume header structure (continued).
Offset Size Name
Description
0x44
0x04 Write Count
The number of times the volume has been
mounted.
0x48
0x08 Encodings
Bitmap
A bitmap representing all text encodings used
in the file system.
0x50
0x04 OS DIR ID
CNID of /System/Library/CoreServices.
0x54
0x04 Finder DIR
ID
The CNID for boot.efi.
0x58
0x04 Mount Open
Dir
Directory ID of the directory to be opened
when the file system is mounted.
0x5C 0x04 OS8/9 Dir
ID
Directory (in OS 8/9) that contains a bootable
system.
0x60
0x04 Reserved
Reserved.
0x64
0x04 OS‐X Dir ID ID of /System/Library/CoreServices.
0x68
0x08 Volume ID
File system volume ID.
One of the most important functions of the volume header is to allow the
main file system structures to be located. There are five files which are of
particular interest. These are the catalog file, the extents overflow file, the
allocation file (bitmap), the attributes file and the startup file. These files
can appear anywhere between the primary and backup volume header
structures. Hence these structures are located from the volume header. Each
of these files is located through an 
‐byte fork structure (Section
12.1.1). At the end of the volume header five of these structures appear
which are used to locate the allocation file (Offset: 0x70), extents overflow
file (Offset: 0xC0), catalog file (Offset: 0x110), attributes file (Offset:
0x160) and the startup file (Offset: 0x1B0), respectively. As with other
forks, if the 
 extents used in the fork structure are insufficient to locate
the contents the extra extents are stored in the extents overflow file.

12.1.4 B‐Trees
As with many modern file systems the metadata files in HFS+ are stored in
B‐Trees. A B‐Tree is composed of a number of nodes, each of which
contains multiple records. Figure 12.1 shows the structure of a HFS+ B‐
Tree.
Figure 12.1 Structural overview of a HFS+ B‐Tree.
Every metadata tree in HFS+ uses the structure shown in Figure 12.1. Every
node begins with a node descriptor which contains information about that
node's position in the tree as a whole. This structure is 
 bytes in size.
The structure of the node descriptor is given in Table 12.8.

Table 12.8 HFS+ B‐Tree node descriptor.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Forward
Link
The node number of the next node of this type or
0 if this is the last node.
0x04
0x04 Back
Link
The node number of the previous node of this
type, or 0 if this is the first node.
0x08
0x01 Node
Type
This is a signed integer representing the node
type. A leaf node has a value of 0xFF (
), an
internal node is 
, a header node is 
 and a
map node is 
.
0x09
0x01 Level
The level, or depth, of this node in the B‐Tree
hierarchy. Note that for the header node this is
zero and for leaf nodes it is one. Internal nodes are
one greater than the child they point to.
0x0A 0x02 # Records The number of records contained in this node.
0x0C 0x02 Reserved Reserved.
The node descriptor provides information about the node itself and its
position in the B‐Tree. The forward and backward links are used to
determine the position of the node in the tree as a whole, while the
remaining fields provide information about the current node. This includes
the node type and level. Certain node types are always at a particular level.
For instance leaf nodes are level 1, while header nodes are level 0. Finally
the node descriptor provides the total number of records in this node.
In total there are four node types in a HFS+ B‐Tree. These are:
Header Node: Each tree contains a single header node which provides
the information required to find other nodes in the tree and information
about the tree as a whole.
Map Nodes: These nodes contain allocation data (bitmaps describing
the free/allocated nodes in the tree). These nodes are used in the case
in which the allocation mapping structure is larger than the space
provided for it in the header node.

Index Nodes: These nodes contain pointers to other nodes in the tree.
The desired pointer is located by examining the keys in the index node.
Leaf Nodes: These nodes contain data records. Data is associated with
a particular key, each of which must be unique.
Examining the node structure in Figure 12.1 shows that the node is
composed of a number of records. At the end of the node there exist a
number of pointers to record offsets inside the node. Each of these offsets is
0x02 bytes in size. There is one more pointer in the node than the total
number of records in the node. This final pointer points to the free space
between the records and the pointers.
Every B‐Tree begins with a header node. As with all nodes the header node
begins with a 
‐byte node descriptor. The header node contains
information about the tree as a whole. The header node always contains
three records. The first is the B‐Tree header record, the second is the user
data record (which is always 
 bytes in length) and the final record is
the map record which occupies the remaining space in the header node. The
forward link value in the header node's node descriptor contains the node
number of the map node (or 
 if no map node is present). The backward
link value is always set to 
.
The header node's header record contains information about the actual B‐
Tree structure. The structure of this record is shown in Table 12.9. This is
always found immediately after the node descriptor (i.e. 
 byte offset).

Table 12.9 HFS+ B‐Tree header node structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Tree Depth
The current depth of the B‐Tree.
0x02
0x04 Root Node
The node number of the root node for the tree.
In the case of small trees the root node may be a
leaf node.
0x06
0x04 Leaf records The total number of records contained in all
leaf nodes in the tree.
0x0A 0x04 First Leaf
Node
Node number of the first leaf node.
0x0E
0x04 Last Leaf
Node
Node number of the last leaf node.
0x12
0x02 Node Size
Node size in bytes.
0x14
0x02 Max. Key
Length
The maximum key length.
0x16
0x04 Total Nodes The total number of nodes in the B‐Tree (both
used and unused).
0x1A 0x04 Free Nodes
The number of unused nodes.
0x1E
0x02 Reserved
Reserved.
0x20
0x04 Clump Size
Generally unused. Sometimes set to the same
value as the clump size in the volume header.
0x24
0x01 B‐Tree Type The B‐Tree type 
 is a control file, 
 and
higher are user trees and 
 is reserved.
0x25
0x01 Key
Compare
Defines if the volume is case sensitive or
insensitive (0xBC and 0xCF, respectively).
0x26
0x04 Attributes
Attribute bit mask.
0x2A 0x04 Reserved
Reserved.
The header record is followed by the user data record. This structure is
always 
 bytes in size. It is used to store some information about the
tree. In many trees this record is empty.

The remaining space in the header node is occupied by the map record. This
is a bitmap structure that provides information about the allocation status of
the various nodes in the tree. The node descriptor, header record and user
record combined occupy 
 bytes; hence, the map record size is node
size less 
 bytes. If this is not sufficiently large to store information
about all the nodes in the tree then extra map nodes are also used. Map
nodes consist of a node descriptor immediately followed by the continued
map structure. The map node descriptor's forward link contains the node
number of the previous node in the map structure. Map nodes can utilise up
to node size less 
 bytes. The 
 bytes are composed of the 
 bytes
for the node descriptor, two 
 byte offset values and 
 bytes of free
space.
The remaining node types are index nodes and leaf nodes. These both use a
common structure called keyed records. Each keyed record consists of a
key length value, followed by a key and then the record data. The size of
the key length and key values are determined by the type of keyed record in
question. The data is dependent on the type of node, index or leaf and the
type of data being stored in the leaf node's records.
In the case of an index node the record data contains pointer records. This
data component of the keyed record merely contains a 
‐byte node
number. This is the node number of the child node in the current tree. In the
case of a leaf node the record data contains the actual data associated with
the key. The data is dependent on the type of tree in question, for instance
catalog node data is different from extents overflow node data. Both leaf
and index nodes will be processed later in this chapter.
12.1.5 Catalog File
The catalog file is analogous to the Master File Table in NTFS. It contains
information about all the files/directories in the volume. This includes the
metadata in relation to the file and also the location of the actual content.
The catalog file is structured as a B‐Tree and hence contains a header node,
along with index and leaf nodes (and map nodes where applicable). The
catalog file is used to locate all files/folders on the volume. The information
to locate the catalog file itself is found in the HFS+ Volume Header
(Section 12.1.3).

Every entry (file or folder) in the catalog file is assigned a unique catalog
node ID (CNID). This is a 
‐byte value. The CNID value is automatically
incremented as new files/folders are added to the volume. CNID values are
not reused until the maximum value (
) is reached. The analyst can
determine if these values have been reused based on the attributes field in
the volume header (Tables 12.5 and 12.6). If this bit is unset the analyst can
determine the order in which files/folders were created based on the CNID.
The first 
 CNID values are reserved (Table 12.2). Note that CNID 0 is
never used as an actual CNID; instead, it serves as a NULL value.
As the catalog file is a B‐Tree it is necessary to understand only the key
format and the record data format in leaf nodes. Table 12.10 shows the
catalog key structure.
Table 12.10 Catalog file key structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Key Length The length of this structure in bytes.
0x02
0x04 Parent ID
The CNID of the containing folder (i.e. the
parent folder).
0x06
0x02 Name
Length
Name length (n) in unicode characters
0x08
(n)
Node Name File/folder name (unicode).
The catalog file's leaf node record data structure is one of four types. These
record types are:
1. Folder Record: This record contains information about a single folder
on the HFS+ volume.
2. File Record: This record contains information about a single file on
the HFS+ volume.
3. Folder Thread Record: This record provides a link between a folder
and its parent folder.
4. File Thread Record: This record provides a link between a file and its
parent folder.

Each data record begins with a record type value. These values are: folder
record (0x0001); file record (0x0002); folder thread record (0x0003); and
file thread record (0x0004). The particular value of the record type field
determines how said data should be interpreted.
Folder records hold information about an individual folder in the HFS+
volume. The structure of these records is shown in Table 12.11
Table 12.11 Structure of the folder record data item in the catalog file.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Record Type
Record type (0x0001 for folder record).
0x02
0x02 Flags
Unused for folders.
0x04
0x04 Valence
Number of files/folders contained in this
folder.
0x08
0x04 CNID
The CNID for this folder. Not to be confused
with the parent CNID in the key.
0x0C 0x04 Creation Date
Folder creation time.
0x10
0x04 Modification
Date
Folder content modification time.
0x14
0x04 Change Date
Folder metadata last modification time.
0x18
0x04 Access Date
Folder content last access time.
0x1C 0x04 Backup Date
Folder last backup time.
0x20
0x10 Permissions
File Permissions (Section 12.1.6).
0x30
0x10 Folder Info
Information used by finder – not part of the
HFS+ structure.
0x40
0x10 Ext. Folder
Info
Further information used by finder.
0x50
0x04 Text Encoding Text Encoding (Section 12.1.7).
0x54
0x04 Reserved
Reserved.
The catalog file record is used to hold information about files in the catalog
file. This includes metadata information and also the data and resource

forks, allowing for the recovery of file content. The structure of the file
record is shown in Table 12.12.
Table 12.12 Structure of the file record data item in the catalog file.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Record Type
Record type (0x0002 for file record).
0x02
0x02 Flags
Flag values:
Bit 0: File Locked;
Bit 1: Thread Exists;
Bit 2: Extended Attributes;
Bit 3: Security Data;
Bit 4: Folder Count;
Bit 5: Hardlink;
0x04
0x04 Reserved
Reserved.
0x08
0x04 CNID
CNID for this folder not to be confused with
the parent's CNID in the key.
0x0C 0x04 Creation Date
File creation time.
0x10
0x04 Modification
Date
File content modification time.
0x14
0x04 Change Date
File metadata change time.
0x18
0x04 Access Date
File content last access time.
0x1C 0x04 Backup Date
File last backup time.
0x20
0x10 Permissions
File Permissions (Section 12.1.6).
0x30
0x10 Folder Info
Information used by finder.
0x40
0x10 Ext. Folder
Info
Further information used by finder.
0x50
0x04 Text Encoding
Text encoding (Section 12.1.7).
0x54
0x04 Reserved
Reserved.
0x58
0x50 Data Fork
Data fork (Section 12.1.1).
0xA8 0x50 Resource Fork
Resource fork (Section 12.1.1).

File content is located through the data fork. In the case of all forks (both
data and resource) the basic fork structure can hold up to eight extents.
However, if the file requires more than 
 extents (i.e. if the file is in 
or more fragments) further extents are found in the extents overflow file.
Thread records are required in HFS+ for all files and folders. These records
link the file/folder to the parent folder in the file system. The structure of a
thread record is shown in Table 12.13.
Table 12.13 Structure of the thread record data item in the catalog file.
Offset Size
Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Record
Type
Record type (0x0003 for folder thread record or
0x0004 for file thread record).
0x02
0x02 Reserved
Reserved.
0x04
0x04 Parent ID
CNID of the parent catalog record.
0x08
0x02 Name
Length
The node's name length (n) in unicode
characters.
0x0A
Node
Name
The node name in unicode characters (max. 255
characters).
12.1.6 HFS+ Permissions
Similar to many of the Linux file systems, HFS+ maintains permissions as
part of the file metadata structures. The HFS+ permission structure is
provided in Table 12.14.

Table 12.14 HFS+ permission structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 UID
The owner's system user ID.
0x04
0x04 GID
The group ID of the group associated with the item.
0x08
0x01 Admin
Flags
BSD flags that can be set only by the superuser.
0x09
0x01 Owner
Flags
BSD flags that can be set by the file owner or the
superuser.
0x0A 0x02 File
Mode
The file mode/permissions analogous to those found
in EXT (Section 8.1.3.1).
0x0C 0x04 Special Unused for normal files and folders. This has
different meanings for different object types. For
instance for a hard link this contains the link
reference number (inode number of the linked file),
for indirect node files this contains the number of
hard links that point to the file and for block and
character devices this contains the raw device
number.
Various owner and admin flags are provided in the BSD permission
structure. The owner flags can be set by the owner or by the superuser. The
various owner flags include:
Bit 0 – No Dump: This file will not be backed up.
Bit 1 – Immutable: The file may not be changed.
Bit 2 – Append: Writes to this file can only append information, not
overwrite it.
Bit 3 – Opaque: The directory is opaque; in other words, it is hidden
when multiple file systems are mounted as a single volume.
The admin flags can be set only by the superuser. These flags include:
Bit 0 – Archived: This file has been archived.
Bit 1 – Immutable: The file may not be changed.

Bit 2 – Append: Writes to this file can only append information, not
overwrite it.
The file mode value is identical to that found in Linux filesystems. This is a
two‐byte structure in which the nine least significant bits represent read,
write and execute permissions for the owner, group and everyone,
respectively. The most significant nibble represents the file type. The
remaining three bits have special meanings. The least significant of these is
the sticky bit. If this is set only the file owner can delete the file. Other
users, even those with write permission to the file, are unable to delete this
file. The remaining two bits are the set UID (most significant) and set GID
(middle bit). If the setuid bit is set then the process will execute with the
permissions of the owner, not the user who executed the file. The setgid bit
has the same effect but for groups instead of users.
12.1.7 Text Encoding
Earlier versions of the HFS file system did not use unicode characters in file
names. Instead they used various text encodings. These values are still used
in the HFS+ file system allowing for multiple encodings. The file/folder
catalog records contain a text encoding field which describes how the text is
encoded in the particular record. A bit field is also used in the volume
header to list the encodings that are present on the device (bits remain set
even if the last file using that encoding is deleted). The valid text encoding
values are shown in Table 12.15.

Table 12.15 Text encoding values.
Encoding
Value Encoding
Value Encoding
Value
Roman
Tamil
Mongolian
Japanese
Telugu
Ethiopic
ChineseTrad
Kannada
CentralEur
Korean
Malayalam
Vietnamese
Arabic
Sinhalese
ExtArabic
Hebrew
Burmese
Symbol
Greek
Khmer
Dingbats
Cyrillic
Thai
Turkish
Devanagari
Laotian
Croatian
Gurmukhi
Georgian
Icelandic
Gujarati
Armenian
Romanian
Oriya
ChineseSimp
Farsi
Bengali
Tibetan
Ukrainian
12.1.8 Extents Overflow File
The extents overflow file is a B‐Tree which contains extents that will not fit
in the data/resource forks that are available in the catalog file itself. These
are used in the case of heavily fragmented files.4 As a B‐Tree, the extents
overflow file contains a header node followed by a number of nodes. As
with all B‐Trees each node begins with a node descriptor.
Leaf node records contain a HFS extent key followed by eight extents. The
structure of the extent key is given in Table 12.16.

Table 12.16 Extents overflow key structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Key
Length
The length of the key in bytes, excluding the key
length itself. This is always 0x0A for extent keys.
0x02
0x01 Fork
Type
The type of fork to which this record applies. This
is either 0x00 (data fork) or 0xFF (resource fork).
0x03
0x01 Padding
0x00 padding byte.
0x04
0x04 CNID
The CNID to which the extents belong.
0x08
0x04 Start
Block
The start block (in the file content) of the first
extent in this file.
In order to locate the relevant entries in the extents overflow file a search
term is formed with the key length, fork type, padding and CNID values.
The starting block is also added (in case there is more than one entry in the
extents overflow file). The starting block is calculated based on the number
of blocks that have already appeared in previous extents (i.e. those in the
catalog file). Once the relevant entry is located in the tree the extents can
then be processed. An example of this is shown in Section 12.3.3.
12.1.9 Allocation File
The allocation file is a bitmap structure describing the allocation status of
every allocation block in the file system. The allocation file is located
through the volume header structure. Each allocation block is represented
by a single bit in the allocation file. A bit value of 
 represents an
allocation block that is currently in use, while a value of 
 represents a
free block.
Each byte represents eight allocation blocks. The most significant bit
represents the allocation block with the lowest block number. To locate the
correct byte for a particular allocation block, the block number must be
divided by 
. This will provide the byte offset to the entry in the
allocation file. Consider block 
. To determine the correct byte this
value is divided by 
 which results in 
. Hence the contents of byte 
must be accessed. Byte seven contains information about blocks 
–

. Assuming that the value at that position is 0xFB (
) then block
 is unallocated. All other blocks represented by this byte are allocated.
12.1.10 HFS+ Journal
As with many modern file systems HFS+ contains a journal. The journal is
used to ensure consistency of the file system in the event of a crash. The
journal records metadata changes. Actual content changes are not journaled.
Updates to HFS+ often require many metadata structures to be updated. For
instance if a new file is added to the file system at a minimum the following
changes are required:
A file record is written to the catalog;
a file thread record is written to the catalog;
the catalog file is restructured (possibly even requiring a new node to
be created);
the allocation bitmap is updated;
the volume header is updated;
the extents overflow file is updated if the file is heavily fragmented.
If the system were to crash during these operations then the file system
could become inconsistent. Hence the changes are first written to the
journal. Only when marked complete there are they then written to disk. If a
crash occurs now the changes can be rebuilt from the journal. If a crash
occurs during the journal write the changes are ignored later. Either way the
file system is left in a consistent state. Once the group of changes have been
written to the disk they can be removed from the journal. The group of
changes are called a transaction. The steps in a transaction are:
1. The transaction commences when the pending changes are written to
the journal file;
2. the journal file is flushed to disk;
3. the transaction is recorded in the journal header;
4. the changes are performed on the actual file system structures; and

5. the journal header is updated to mark the transaction as complete.
Upon mounting a file system the journal structure is checked. Transactions
may have failed at any stage in the above process. Those that fail before
step 3 are lost, no record of them exists but the file system is still consistent.
Those transactions that fail after step 3 have been successfully recorded in
the journal and as such these transactions can be applied to the file system.
In either case, the end result of the process is that the file system is
consistent!
The journal file itself is a fixed‐size contiguous file. Implementations of
HFS+ must ensure that this is always the case. The file can never be resized
or split. The journal file consists of a header which contains information
about the journal and the current transactions in use and also a buffer. The
journal buffer occupies the remainder of the journal file. The buffer is
circular in nature. All transactions are written to the next available block in
the journal buffer. This continues until the end is reached in which case the
buffer ‘wraps around’ and begins to overwrite the first entry. No
information is removed from the journal in any other way. This means that
it is possible to use the journal to recover files that were deleted prior to the
relevant block being overwritten.
The journal is located from the journal info block (which is itself located
from the volume header). Table 12.17 shows the journal info block
structure. The flags inform the analyst of the journal's location, either on the
current device or on a separate device entirely. The journal itself is located
using the offset and size values. The offset is a byte offset relative to the
start of the volume, while the size value is the size of the journal in bytes.

Table 12.17 HFS+ Journal info block structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Flags
One‐bit flags
0x01: Journal on filesystem;
0x02: Journal on other device;
0x04: Journal invalid.
0x04
0x20 Device
Signature
Used when the journal is on another device.
0x24
0x08 Offset
Byte offset to the start of the journal relative to
the start of the volume.
0x2C 0x08 Size
Size of journal in bytes.
0x34
0x40 Reserved
Reserved.
Analysis of the journal proceeds through the analysis of the journal header.
This structure is used to locate transactions in the journal itself. The
structure of the journal header is provided in Table 12.18.

Table 12.18 The journal header structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Magic
Magic value (0x4A4E4C78) used to verify
journal integrity.
0x04
0x04 Endian
Endian magic value (0x12345678) also used to
verify integrity.
0x08
0x08 Start
Byte offset to the first (oldest) transaction in the
journal. This offset is relative to the start of the
journal header structure.
0x10
0x08 End
Byte offset to the last (newest) transaction in the
journal. This offset is relative to the start of the
journal header structure.
0x18
0x08 Size
Journal size in bytes.
0x20
0x04 BL Header
Size
Size of the block list header in bytes.
0x24
0x04 Checksum
Checksum for the journal header structure.
0x28
0x04 JH Size
Journal header size. This is generally equal to
the sector size of the device.
The start and end values provide some further information about the current
state of the journal. In the case where the end value is less than the start
value the journal buffer has wrapped and some transactions have been
overwritten. In the case that these values are equal then there are no
transactions that need to be replayed.
12.2 Analysis of HFS+
This section examines the analysis method used in order to rebuild a HFS+
file system and to extract content and metadata from said file system.
Section 12.3 will introduce some advanced topics in the analysis of HFS+.
12.2.1 Creating HFS+ File Systems
Support for HFS+ is included in all Linux distributions by default. Listing
12.2 shows the command to create a new HFS+ file system from the Linux

terminal. HFS+ file systems can also be created from macOS; however,
these are generally mounted automatically by macOS and many files are
also created automatically during this process. Hence, for learning about the
file system it is preferable to create these exemplars using Linux.
12.2.2 Supplied HFS+ Image Files
A number of HFS+ disk images are available from the book's website.
These images are summarised in Table 12.19. The images consist of a basic
HFS+ file system with a number of files and directories along with further
file systems to demonstrate advanced concepts in HFS+. These concepts
include deleted files; multi‐level B‐Trees; fragmented files; and links.
Table 12.19 Supplied HFS+ disk images.
Filename
Description
HFS_V1.E01 Simple file system containing four files and a single
directory.
HFS_V2.E01 This file system is created from the HFS_V1.E01 file
system by deleting two files (delete.txt and foggy.jpg).
HFS_V3.E01 This file system contains a directory with many files in
order to demonstrate multi‐level B‐Trees.
HFS_V4.E01 This file system contains a heavily fragmented file.
HFS_V5.E01 This file system was created on MacOS and contains both
hard and soft links.
These images are used throughout this chapter to demonstrate the manual
analysis of the HFS+ file system. Subsequent images are used to
demonstrate some advanced topics in the HFS+ file system that may affect
analysis.

12.2.3 HFS+ Manual Analysis
This section presents a method of manual analysis for the HFS+ file system.
This method is as follows:
1. Process the volume header;
2. locate the catalog file;
3. process the catalog B‐Tree;
4. gather metadata;
5. recover file content.
The following sections describe the method in detail using the
HFS_V1.E01 file system.
12.2.3.1 Process the Volume Header
As with all file systems the first step is to process the file system
information structures. The HFS+ volume header is located at offset
 bytes in a HFS+ disk image. Listing 12.3 shows the contents of the
volume header in HFS_V1.E01.

When processing a HFS+ file system there are some key items of interest in
the volume header structure. Table 12.20 shows some of the items that are
of particular interest and their associated values from Listing 12.3.
Table 12.20 Processed volume header in HFS_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x02 Signature
H+
0x02
0x02 Version
0x04 (
)
0x04
0x04 Attributes
0x00000100
(Unmounted properly)
0x10
0x04 Creation date
0xE17279B7
09.11.2023 11:57:43
0x14
0x04 Modification date 0xE1727F8B
09.11.2023 12:22:35
0x18
0x04 Backup date
0x00000000
0x1C 0x04 Checked date
0xE17279B7
09.11.2023 11:57:43
0x20
0x04 File Count
0x04 (
)
0x24
0x04 Folder count
0x02 (
)
0x28
0x04 Block size
0x1000 (
)
0x2C 0x04 # Blocks
0x20000 (
)
0x30
0x04 # Free Blocks
0x1F791 (
)
The combination of the signature (H+) and the version (
) informs that
this is a HFS+ file system. In Table 12.20, the attribute value is determined
to be 0x00000100 meaning that the eighth bit is set. This bit means that the
file system was unmounted properly (Table 12.6). Note that the CNID
reused bit is not set in this file system. This means that the order of file
creation events can be inferred from the CNID values. Files with larger
CNID values were created after files with smaller values.

The volume header structure in HFS+ provides four different time values.
Note that the creation time is stored in local time while the others are stored
as UTC. The creation time is often used as a device identifier and should
not be affected by timezone/daylight savings changes. From Table 12.20 the
creation and checked date/time values are 9 November 2023 at 11:57:43
UTC, while the last modified time is 9 November 2023 at 12:22:35 UTC.
The volume header also provides information on the volume usage. From
Table 12.20 it is clear that there are only 
 files and 
 folders present on
this device. The volume header provides information about the allocation
blocks in the file system. Firstly, it provides the allocation block size, in this
case 
 bytes. This piece of information is vital for all subsequent
analyses as all addressing is done through block numbers rather than actual
byte offsets. Finally the volume header provides information on the block
usage statistics. Table 12.20 shows the total number of blocks to be
 of which 
 blocks are currently available for use.
12.2.3.2 Locate the Catalog File
The catalog file provides information about all the files/folders in the
volume. It is the single most important structure for file system forensics of
HFS+ volumes. Directly after the volume header (offset 0x70 relative to the
start of the volume header structure) are found five fork structures. These
structures are each 0x50 bytes in size. These five structures refer to the
locations of the allocation file, the extents overflow file, the catalog file, the
attributes file and the startup file, respectively. This means that to find the
catalog file location it is necessary to process the third fork after the volume
header. This is located at offset 0x110 relative to the start of the volume
header. The contents of this data fork are shown in Listing 12.4. The
‘header’ values are highlighted, while the remaining space is used to store
extents.

The contents of Listing 12.4 are processed in Table 12.21. In this case there
is only one single extent present. The basic fork structure allows for up to
 extents to be stored for a single file. If any more are needed these are
stored in the extents overflow file.
Table 12.21 Processed values for the HFS+ catalog file fork in
HFS_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x08 Logical Size
0x400000 (
)
0x08
0x04 Clump Size
0x400000 (
)
0x0C 0x04 Total Blocks
0x400 (
)
0x10
0x04 Extent Start
0x405 (
)
0x14
0x04 Extent Blocks 0x400 (
)
Table 12.21 shows that the catalog file is contiguous (only a single extent is
used) and that it begins at block 0x405 (
) and is 0x400 (
)
blocks in size. Listing 12.5 shows the command to extract the catalog file
from the supplied image. The accuracy of this can be confirmed using
Sleuth Kit to recover the catalog file and comparing the MD5 values!
12.2.3.3 Process the Catalog B‐Tree
Once the catalog file has been located the next step is to process the content
of this file. The catalog is a B‐Tree and as such the first node is a header
node. Listing 12.6 shows the node descriptor for the catalog's first node
while Table 12.22 shows the processed values for the node descriptor.

As this is a header node most of the information is standard. The forward
and backward link values are 0x00, the node type is 0x01 and the level is
0x00. The header node contains three records (the header information
record, the user data record and the map record).
Table 12.22 HFS+ Catalog file header node descriptor.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x04 Forward‐Link 0x00 (
)
0x04
0x04 Back‐Link
0x00 (
)
0x08
0x01 Node Type
0x01 (Header)
0x09
0x01 Level
0x00 (
)
0x0A 0x02 # Records
0x03 (
)
0x0C 0x02 Reserved
0x00 (
)
The node descriptor in the header node is immediately followed by the
header record structure. This area is shown in Listing 12.7 and processed in
Table 12.23.
Key information from the header record includes:
The node size: The node size is used to find any node in the tree. The
header node is node 
 and the byte offset to a particular node number
is found using 
.
The root node: The root node is where tree processing begins. In the
case of small trees the root node may also be a leaf node, in larger trees
the root node will be an index node.
In addition to the above information the header record contains much more
information about the structure of the tree. For instance in Table 12.23 it is
clear that this tree contains 
 (0x0E) leaf records. As the tree depth, first

leaf node and last leaf node values are all one; it is clear that the tree only
contains a single node (i.e. the root node is a leaf node).
Table 12.23 HFS+ B‐Tree header record for the catalog file's header node
in HFS_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Tree Depth
0x01 (
)
0x02
0x04 Root Node
0x01 (
)
0x06
0x04 Leaf records
0x0E (
)
0x0A 0x04 First Leaf Node
0x01 (
)
0x0E
0x04 Last Leaf Node
0x01 (
)
0x12
0x02 Node Size
0x1000 (
)
0x14
0x02 Max. Key Length
0x204 (
)
0x16
0x04 Total Nodes
0x400 (
)
0x1A 0x04 Free Nodes
0x3FE (
)
0x1E
0x02 Reserved
0x00 (
)
0x20
0x04 Clump Size
0x400000
(
)
0x24
0x01 B‐Tree Type
0x00 (
)
0x25
0x01 Key Compare Type 0xCF
0x26
0x04 Attributes
0x06
0x2A 0x04 Reserved
0x00 (
)
Generally there is no need to process the user information record or the map
record in the catalog tree. Analysis proceeds to the root node. From Table
12.23 the node size is 
 bytes and the root node is found in node 
.
Listing 12.8 shows the node descriptor for this node with the processed
values appearing in Table 12.24.

Table 12.24 Catalog file's root node descriptor in HFS_V1.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x04 Forward‐Link 0x00 (
)
0x04
0x04 Back‐Link
0x00 (
)
0x08
0x01 Node Type
0xFF (Leaf)
0x09
0x01 Level
0x01 (
)
0x0A 0x02 # Records
0x0E (
)
0x0C 0x02 Reserved
0x00 (
)
The root node's node descriptor shows that this is a leaf node (node type
0xFF) containing 
 records. The pointers to the records are found at the
end of the node. Each record pointer is two bytes in size. A pointer exists
for each record in the node (
 in this case) and also for the start of the
free space area. Hence in this example there are 
 pointers in total.
These are shown in Listing 12.9.
The values for the pointers (in reverse order) are 0x0E, 0x7A, 0x98, 0x102,
0x214, 0x324, 0x3AE, 0x3EA, 0x406, 0x51A, 0x62C, 0x652, 0x674 and
0x698 with the free space area starting at 0x6BC. All of these offsets are
relative to the start of the node.
Each record begins with a key structure (Table 12.10). Listing 12.10 shows
the key structure at offset 0x51A from the root node in the catalog file.
From Listing 12.10 the key length is 0x18 bytes (excluding the key length
field itself) meaning that the key occupies 0x1A bytes in total. The parent
ID is 0x11, the name is 0x09 unicode characters long and the name itself is

foggy.jpg. Table 12.25 shows all the processed keys for the 
 items in
the root node.

Table 12.25 Processed keys in the HFS_V1.E01 catalog file's root node.
Offsets are relative to the start of the node.
Item 1
Item 2
Item 3
Item 4
Offset
0x0E
0x7A
0x98
0x102
Key Length
0x12
0x06
0x10
0x18
Parent ID
0x01
0x02
0x02
0x02
Name Length 0x06
0x00
0x05
0x09
Name
HFS‐FS
—
Files
hills.jpg
Type
0x01
0x03
0x01
0x02
(Folder)
(Folder Th.) (Folder)
(File)
Item 5
Item 6
Item 7
Item 8
Offset
0x214
0x324
0x3AE
0x3EA
Key Length
0x16
0x30
0x06
0x06
Parent ID
0x02
0x02
0x10
0x11
Name Length 0x08
0x15
0x00
0x00
Name
info.txt
HFS+
—
—
Private Data
Type
0x02
0x01
0x03
0x03
(File)
(Folder)
(Folder Th.) (Folder Th.)
Item 9
Item 10
Item 11
Item 12
Offset
0x406
0x51A
0x62C
0x652
Key Length
0x1A
0x18
0x06
0x06
Parent ID
0x11
0x11
0x12
0x13
Name Length 0x0A
0x09
0x00
0x00
Name
delete.txt foggy.jpg
—
—
Type
0x02
0x02
0x04
0x04
(File)
(File)
(File Th.)
(File Th.)
Item 13
Item 14

Item 1
Item 2
Item 3
Item 4
Offset
0x674
0x698
Key Length
0x06
0x06
Parent ID
0x14
0x15
Name Length 0x00
0x00
Name
—
—
Type
0x04
0x04
(File Th.) (File Th.)
As described in Section 12.1.5 each of the catalog keys is followed
immediately by one of four types of record. Each of these structures (folder,
file, folder thread and file thread) begins with a two‐byte record type value.
These are also shown in Table 12.25.
Table 12.25 shows the processed values from the Catalog file. From this it
is clear that there are three folders (HFS‐FS,5Files and HFS+ Private
Data6) and four files present on the device (hills.jpg, info.txt, delete.txt
and foggy.jpg). Listing 12.11 shows the output from the fls command when
run upon HFS_V1.E01.
12.2.3.4 Gather Metadata
In order to gather metadata the analyst must process the file/folder records
in the catalog file. Consider the file foggy.jpg in Table 12.25. The record
type of this is given as 0x02 meaning this is a file record. The structure of
the file record is given in Table 12.12. The file record appears immediately

after the key. From Table 12.25 the offset to this item is 0x51A, with a key
length of 0x18. This implies that the actual file record begins at offset 0x1A
(the two bytes for the key length field are not included in the key length
value). Listing 12.12 shows the contents of the catalog file at offset 0x534.
The size of this structure is 0xF8 bytes. Table 12.26 shows the processed
values of this file record structure.

Table 12.26 Partially processed catalog file record for the foggy.jpg file.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x02 Record Type
0x0002 (File)
0x08
0x04 CNID
0x15 (
)
0x0C 0x04 Creation Date
0xE1727F85
2023‐11‐09 12:22:29 (UTC)
0x10
0x04 Modification Date 0xE1727F85
2023‐11‐09 12:22:29 (UTC)
0x14
0x04 Change Date
0xE1727F85
2023‐11‐09 12:22:29 (UTC)
0x18
0x04 Access Date
0xE1727F85
2023‐11‐09 12:22:29 (UTC)
0x1C 0x04 Backup Date
0x00 (
)
0x20
0x10 Permissions
Mode/Permissions: 0x81E8
(rwxr‐x‐‐‐)
0x58
0x50 Data Fork
Logical Size: 0x2CC83 (
)
Clump Size: 0x00 (
)
Num. Blocks: 0x2D (
)
Extent Start: 0x841 (
)
Extent Size: 0x2D (
)
0xA8 0x50 Resource Fork
Not present
From Table 12.26 the metadata in relation to foggy.jpg can be generated
and the file's content can be recovered. In terms of metadata it is clear that
the foggy.jpg file has CNID 0x15 (
). This can be compared to Listing
12.11 in which the fls output provides an identifying number for the
foggy.jpg file of 
; in other words, fls is using the CNID for the file.
The metadata includes five timestamps (although only four are specified in
this example).

The permissions value is 0x81E8, which is interpreted in the same manner
as in Linux file systems. This implies that this is a regular file with
permissions rwxr‐x‐‐‐. The owner and group IDs are 0 meaning that the root
user and group owns the file.
Table 12.26 can be compared with the output from the istat command for
this file shown in Listing 12.13.
12.2.3.5 Recover File Content
The file content is also recovered through the catalog file record. The data
fork (Section 12.1.1) contains the location of the file's content. The
processed data fork for foggy.jpg is shown in Table 12.26. The fork header

shows the file size (0x2CC83 bytes) and the total number of blocks
occupied by the file's contents (0x2D). In this case there is only a single
extent structure, beginning at block 0x841 and occupying 0x2D blocks. The
actual file size is 0x2CC83 bytes. Listing 12.14 shows the command to
extract this file. The recovered file is shown in Figure 12.2.
Figure 12.2 The recovered foggy.jpg file.
12.3 HFS+ Advanced Analysis
This section examines some of the more complex topics involved in the
analysis of HFS+ file systems. It begins with an analysis of deleted files and

shows the changes that occur in the file system upon deletion rendering the
file unrecoverable using traditional analysis techniques. To this point the
encountered HFS+ B‐Trees have been very simple, each requiring only a
single leaf node. This section proceeds to examine more complex trees with
more than one level. Finally this section examines fragmented files
especially massively fragmented files in which the extents overflow file is
required.
12.3.1 Deleted Files
Recovery of deleted files is generally not possible in HFS+ from the basic
file system structures. Although the file content remains in place after
deletion (Listing 12.15), the catalog entry is removed. This means that file
recovery can be performed only by using the journal structures.
Figure 12.3 shows a file about to be deleted (left). Once deletion occurs the
catalog file is immediately restructured overwriting the deleted record.
However, it is possible to discover older records in the slack space that is
created after the restructuring process occurs. In the case of the
HFS_V2.E01 image there are older copies of the file thread records for
both deleted files present but there is not sufficient information present to
recover the file's content.

Figure 12.3 A HFS+ Catalog node before deletion (left) and after deletion
(right).
12.3.2 Index Nodes
To this point all of the trees that have been examined have consisted of only
a single level.7 Generally file systems will be too complex for one single
node to be sufficient to store all the required information. Hence index (or
interior) nodes are normally found in trees.
Similar to leaf nodes, index nodes are another form of keyed record. While
the keyed records in the catalog file's leaf nodes contain a key followed by
the actual catalog record itself, in an index node the key is followed by a
pointer to the relevant child node.
Figure 12.1 showed the overall structure of the B‐Tree. The index nodes are
searched based on the keys. In order to demonstrate this it is best to use an
example. The file HFS_V3.E01 contains a HFS+ disk image with many

files. Hence the catalog file requires more than one node to store all
information. Most of the file names (and content) in this image are
randomly generated; however, there is a file called hills.jpg present in the
disk image. This file is located in the file system root. The task is to locate
the catalog record for this file.
The first step in locating the file is to build the key value for this file. The
key consists of the CNID of the parent folder, followed by the name length,
followed by the name itself. Listing 12.16 shows the key value (excluding
the key length – 0x18).
As with all B‐Trees in HFS+ the next step is to locate the root node of the
tree. The header node (descriptor and header record) is shown in Listing
12.17 along with the header record interpretation in Table 12.27.

Table 12.27 Partially processed header record from the catalog file's header
node in HFS_V3.E01.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x02 Tree Depth
0x02 (
)
0x02
0x04 Root Node
0x3 (
)
0x06
0x04 Leaf Records
0x496 (
)
0x0A 0x04 First Leaf Node
0x01 (
)
0x0E
0x04 Last Leaf Node
0x44 (
)
0x12
0x02 Node Size
0x1000 (
)
0x14
0x02 Max. Key Length 0x204 (
)
0x16
0x04 Total Nodes
0x400 (
)
0x1A 0x04 Free Nodes
0x3B6 (
)
In this case the tree consists of two levels. This means that one index node
must be processed before arriving at the leaf nodes and the desired catalog
record. In this case the task is to search for the file /hills.jpg.
The search for the key begins from the root node (Node 0x3 – Table 12.27).
Listing 12.18 shows the first two keys and their corresponding offsets in the
root node of the catalog file. Table 12.28 shows the keys for each of these
structures (parent ID and filename) along with the desired search key.

Table 12.28 Keys from the two items in the root node with their pointer
values in Listing 12.18 along with the desired search term.
Key
Parent ID
Name
Pointer
Key 1 0x01 (
)
HFS‐FS
0x01 (
)
Key 2 0x16 (
) a1028.txt 0x2B (
)
Search 0x02 (
)
hills.jpg
The search operation begins with the parent ID field. The desired search
term is 0x02. Key 1's parent ID is 0x01, which is smaller than the desired
search term. Key 2's parent ID is 0x16 which is larger than the desired
search term. Hence the desired file must be found by following key 1. The
pointer in key 1 is 0x01. Hence the search must continue in node 0x01
(Listing 12.19).
Index nodes in all binary trees in HFS+ are searched in the same manner as
the catalog file. The only difference is in exactly how the key structure is

formed and the order in which these items are searched. The next section
will show another key type found in the extents overflow file.
From Listing 12.19 the CNID of hills.jpg is seen to be 0x14 (
). This
can be confirmed by running fls on the disk image.
12.3.3 Fragmented Files
Fragmented files in HFS+ can be stored in one of two ways. Due to the size
of the data fork, files with up to eight extents require no extra storage as all
information necessary to locate their content is found in the catalog file.
Files which have more than eight extents will require the use of the extents
overflow file. HFS_V4.E01 contains a fragmented file called hills.jpg
(CNID: 
). The file information for this file is found at key index
0x284 in block 0x01 of the catalog file. This structure is shown in Listing
12.20. Note this listing begins after the catalog key structure.
In Listing 12.20 the general fork information is highlighted, while the eight
extents follow this. The general fork information provides the file size
(0x39CA7 bytes) and the total number of blocks (0x3A). Table 12.29 shows
the processed extents.

Table 12.29 Processed extents for hills.jpg (CNID: 
) in
HFS_V4.E01.
Start Blk.
# Blocks
Extent 1 0x2DE (
)
0x03 (
)
Extent 2 0x30B (
)
0x03 (
)
Extent 3 0x347 (
)
0x03 (
)
Extent 4 0x3A1 (
)
0x03 (
)
Extent 5 0x3CE (
)
0x03 (
)
Extent 6 0x458 (
) 0x03 (
)
Extent 7 0x49D (
) 0x03 (
)
Extent 8 0x557 (
) 0x03 (
)
From Table 12.29 it is clear that the start of the file's contents can be found
in block 
. However, Table 12.29 provides information about a total of
 blocks of data, but the extent header shows that there should be 
blocks. Hence 
 blocks have yet to be located.
The data fork contained in the catalog record contains eight extents. Any
files that require less than eight fragments can be recovered from the
catalog record itself. In the case that a file requires more than eight extents,
the remaining extents are found in the extents overflow file. The extents
overflow file is another B‐Tree structure which can be located from the
volume header (or recovered with Sleuth Kit). Listing 12.21 shows the
header node of the extents overflow file. The node descriptor merely shows
this to be a header node (type 0x01 and 0x03 records in the node). The
processed header record is shown in Table 12.30.

Table 12.30 Partially processed header record from the extents overflow
file's header node in Listing 12.21.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x02 Tree Depth
0x01 (
)
0x02
0x04 Root Node
0x01 (
)
0x06
0x04 Leaf Records
0x02 (
)
0x0A 0x04 First Leaf Node
0x01 (
)
0x0E
0x04 Last Leaf Node
0x01 (
)
0x12
0x02 Node Size
0x1000 (
)
0x14
0x02 Max. Key Length 0x0A (
)
0x16
0x04 Total Nodes
0x100 (
)
0x1A 0x04 Free Nodes
0xFE (
)
Table 12.30 shows that this extents overflow file is very small. In total there
are only two records in this file. These records occupy a single node (node
0x01). Before proceeding to analyse this node, it is first necessary to
determine the structures that are found there. Table 12.31 shows the key
structure used in the extents overflow file.

Table 12.31 Extents overflow file's key structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Key
Length
Every key in HFS+ uses a key length field, which
shows the length of the key in bytes (excluding the
length field itself). In the case of the extents
overflow file the key length is always 
 bytes in
size.
0x02
0x01 Fork
Type
The fork type to which this extent record applies.
The value 0x00 is used for a data fork, while 0xFF
is used for a resource fork.
0x03
0x01 Padding Padding.
0x04
0x04 CNID
The CNID to which this record applies.
0x08
0x04 Start
Block
The starting block of the first extent described in
this record.
The desired key for searching for hills.jpg is therefore composed of the fork
type (0x00 for a data fork), padding (0x00), the CNID (0x0000285C) and
finally the block number in the file's content to which the extent refers.
 blocks were found in the catalog record's data fork, meaning that the
desired key value should be looking for block 
 which is 0x00000018.8
Listing 12.22 shows the entire search key that will be used.
Listing 12.23 shows partial content of node 1 in the extents overflow file.
This begins with the node descriptor and ends with the list of offsets to
individual records. Both records in the extents overflow file refer to
hills.jpg file.

The processed keys are shown in Table 12.32. The first key is followed by
eight further extent structures with the second containing a further four
extents. The processed values of these are shown in Table 12.33. Each
extents overflow record can store up to eight extents. However, in this case
the final three are not required.
Table 12.32 Processed extents overflow keys from Listing 12.23.
Offset Size Name
Key 1
Key 2
0x00
0x02 Key Length 0x0A (
)
0x0A (
)
0x02
0x01 Fork Type
0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x03
0x01 Padding
0x00 (
)
0x00 (
)
0x04
0x04 CNID
0x285C (
) 0x285C (
)
0x04
0x04 Start Block 0x18 (
)
0x30 (
)

Table 12.33 Processed extents from the data forks in Listing 12.23.
Record 1
Record 2
Start Blk.
# Blocks
Start Blk.
# Blocks
0x581 (
) 0x03 (
) 0x6E9 (
) 0x03 (
)
0x5B4 (
) 0x03 (
) 0x71F (
) 0x03 (
)
0x5E7 (
) 0x03 (
) 0x725 (
) 0x03 (
)
0x5ED (
) 0x03 (
) 0x737 (
) 0x01 (
)
0x64D (
) 0x03 (
)
0x68C (
) 0x03 (
)
0x6AA (
) 0x03 (
)
0x6CB (
) 0x03 (
)
Table 12.33 provides information on the remaining blocks in the file.
Combining this with Table 12.29 shows that all 
 allocation blocks are
now accounted for. This highly fragmented file requires 
 extents to
record the locations of 
 allocation blocks. Eight of the extents are
found in the data fork of the catalog record, with the remaining extents
found in two records in the extents overflow file. The result of this analysis
can be confirmed using Sleuth Kit's istat command as shown in Listing
12.24.
The information discovered to date can be used to recover the contents of
the file. The volume header shows the block size to be 
 bytes. This

file occupies 
 blocks in their entirety as shown in Listing 12.24. These
account for 
 bytes. However, the data fork in the
catalog record (Listing 12.20) shows the file size to be 0x39CA7 (
) bytes. This means that the final 
 bytes are found in the
final block, 
. Listing 12.25 shows an excerpt from a sequence of
commands to recover this file. The result of these commands is also
compared to those of Sleuth Kit showing that the end result of the manual
process is identical to that of the automated process.
12.3.4 Links
As with many file systems HFS+ allows links to be created in the file
system. Both symbolic (soft) and hard links can be created in HFS+. For the
purposes of this section, the disk image HFS_V5.E01 is used. Note that this
disk image was created on an Apple system and therefore has more
information present than the other file systems examined to this point.
This section begins by examining the symbolic link structure in HFS+.
Symbolic links store the path/file name of the link target file; hence, the link
file is stored as an ordinary file. After recovery of the catalog file from
HFS_V5.E01, Listing 12.26 shows the file record for the symbolic link
named softlink.jpg.

Examining the catalog record for this symbolic link begins with the file
mode value (0xA1ED). The most significant nibble of the Unix
mode/permission value represents the file type. The value of 0xA represents
a symbolic link file. Additionally in HFS+ the finder information structure
begins with the ASCII values slnk representing a symbolic link. Note that
this is always followed by the ASCII value rhap. Hence the combination of
the mode (0xA) and the values slnk and rhap show that this file represents a
symbolic link.
In order to determine the link target the data fork is processed. From the
header it is clear that data size is 0x0C (
) bytes and occupies a single
extent. The extent contains one single block (only 
 bytes are actually
used) and begins at allocation block (0x1F40). Listing 12.27 shows the
command to recover this file.
This shows that the symbolic link file (softlink.jpg) contains a link to the
file located one level higher in the directory hierarchy with the name
hills.jpg. But what happens in the case of hard links. The file hardlink.jpg
is also a link to the hills.jpg file found in HFS_V5.E01 but in this case it is
a hard link. The implementation of hard links in HFS+ is unusual. Firstly
when a hard link is created the original file (target) content is copied to a
file in the HFS+ Private Data directory. This can be seen in the output of
fls on the HFS_V5.E01 file system as shown in Listing 12.28. This clearly
shows the new file iNode23 in the HFS+ Private Data directory. Sleuth Kit

shows the file to share a CNID number (
) with the original file
hills.jpg and also with the link, hardlink.jpg. However, as will be seen
later, this is merely a presentation convention used by Sleuth Kit.
The original file, hills.jpg, initially had a CNID value of 0x17 (
). With
the creation of a hard link this file became iNode23 in the HFS+ Private
Data directory. The current catalog record for hills.jpg is shown in Listing
12.29.
Examining this record shows that the CNID is 0x19 (
) and not 0x17 as
had appeared previously. Directly after the permissions string is found the
inode number (0x17). This can be added to the word iNode to get the target
of the link.9 Finally the Finder information structure will contain the ASCII
values hlnkhfs+ to denote that this catalog record refers to a hard link. The
catalog record for the hardlink.jpg file itself is shown in Listing 12.30.
This shows a similar pattern, the only difference being that the CNID of this
record is 0x1A (
).

In order to recover the content of a hard link file, the catalog record for the
newly created file should be examined. In this case the file is called
iNode23 and is found in the HFS+ Private Data directory. The catalog
record for this file is shown in Listing 12.31.
This record clearly shows the original CNID (0x17 – 
) along with a
data fork that is used to locate the actual content (the extent is highlighted).
Recall from Listing 12.28 that Sleuth Kit displays only a single CNID
number for all three files (hills.jpg, hardlink.jpg and iNode23). This
CNID is the one found in the iNode23 file.
12.4 Summary
This chapter introduced the first of the Apple file systems, HFS+. This file
system was the standard in all Apple devices for many years. In its day it
was an advanced file system allowing for 
‐bit addressing and fast
searching through the use of B‐Trees. It has not kept pace with modern
storage devices and as such is less frequently encountered now.

The HFS+ file system utilises a number of structures that are key for file
system forensic analysis. One of the first HFS+ structures analysed by file
system forensic tools for macOS is that of the volume header. This structure
is analogous to the volume boot sector found in Windows file systems (and
also the superblocks found in Linux file systems). It contains much
information about the file system and is the area of disk that forensic tools
such as fsstat mainly query.
In order to recover file content and metadata the catalog file is required.
This structure, similar to the MFT in NTFS, contains information about all
files and directories in the file system. It contains a wealth of information
about the contents of the file system. This structure is used to gather all
metadata related to files in the file system and also to locate the content of
the file. In HFS+, file content is located through the use of data forks. Each
fork can store information on up to eight extent structures. In the event that
more than eight extents are required, the extents overflow file is used to
store more extents. Theoretically there is no limit to the number of extents
that can be stored in relation to a single file.
As storage technology advanced HFS+ began to show its age. The use of
‐bit CNID values leads to a limit on the number of files that can be
used (
 billion). This, combined with 
‐bit block addresses,
meant that the file system was unable to scale to larger devices. In 2017
Apple began to deploy HFS+'s replacement, APFS. The APFS file system is
examined in the next chapter.
Exercises
The following questions should be answered in relation to HFS_V3.E01.
1. Answer the following questions in relation to this file system:
a. When was the file system created?
b. How many files/directories are present in the file system?
c. How many free blocks are present on the file system?
d. What size are the allocation blocks?
2. Locate the file records in the catalog file for the following files:

a. hills.jpg located in the root directory
b. foggy.jpg located in the Files directory (CNID: 
)
3. In relation to the file foggy.jpg answer the following questions:
a. What is the file size?
b. When was the file last modified?
c. What are the file permissions?
d. Which text encoding is used in this file?
4. Manually recover the contents of foggy.jpg.
Bibliography
Altheide, C. and Carvey, H.A. (2011). Digital Forensics with Open Source
Tools: Using Open Source Platform Tools for Performing Computer
Forensics on Target Systems: Windows, Mac, Linux, UNIX, etc.
Rockland, MA:Syngress; Oxford.
Apple Developer (2004). Technical Note TN1150: HFS Plus Volume
Format [Internet]. developer.apple.com.
https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/technotes/tn/tn1150.html
(accessed 14 August 2024).
Burghardt, A. and Feldman, A.J. (2008). Using the HFS+ journal for deleted
file recovery. Digital Investigation 5: S76–S82.
Craiger, P. and Burke, P. (2005). Mac Forensics: Mac OS X and the HFS+
File System. Department of Engineering Technology University of
Central Florida.
Craiger, P. and Burke, P. (2006). Mac OS X forensics. In: Advances in
Digital Forensics II, vol. 2006, 159–170. Orlando, FL; New
York:Springer.
Fortuna, A. (2020). iOS Forensics: HFS+ file system, partitions and
relevant evidences –Andrea Fortuna [Internet].

https://www.andreafortuna.org/2020/08/31/ios-forensics-hfs-file-system-
partitions-and-relevant-evidences/
Garijo, J.M. (2015). Mac OS X Forensics. Technical Report, RHUL‐MA‐
2015‐8.
Maes, B. (2012). Comparison of contemporary file systems [Internet].
https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?
repid=rep1type=pdfdoi=cdf3d691255bbe069492f3b430067037e2f3ade0
(accessed 14 August 2024).
Metz, J. (2024). libfshfs/documentation/Hierarchical File System
(HFS).asciidoc at main. libyal/libfshfs [Internet]. GitHub. 2024 [cited
2024 April 2].
https://github.com/libyal/libfshfs/blob/main/documentation/Hierarchical
(accessed 14 August 2024).
Schneider, J., Eichhorn, M., and Freiling, F. (2022). Ambiguous file system
partitions. Forensic Science International: Digital Investigation 42:
301399.
Su, L.J., Wu, S.X., and Cao, D. (2011). Windows‐based analysis for HFS+
file system. Advanced Materials Research 179‐180: 538–543.
Ware, S. (2012). Hfs plus file system exposition and forensics. M.S.
Dissertation. Florida:University of Central Florida, 145p.
Wikipedia (2024). HFS ‐ Sleuth KitWiki [Internet]. wiki.sleuthkit.org.
[cited 2024 April 2]. https://wiki.sleuthkit.org/index.php?title=HFS
(accessed 14 August 2024).
Notes
1 Similar to the inode number in EXT and the MFT record number in
NTFS.
2 The volume header structure will inform the analyst if the CNID values
have been exhausted (and therefore reused).

3 One exception to this is the creation date in the HFS+ volume header.
This value is stored in local time, rather than GMT.
4 More than eight extents.
5 This folder will not appear in the file listing. This folder is the actual root
folder of the file system. The name is taken from the volume label
assigned when the file system was created. If no volume label is
provided this is generally called untitled.
6 The HFS+ Private Data folder's name actually begins with four null bytes.
This is often written as ^^^^HFS+ Private Data. This is a file‐system‐
created folder (similar to lost+found in ext) which will not appear in a
regular file listing.
7 This means that the trees consist of two used nodes, the header node and a
single leaf/root node.
8 Allocation block numbering begins at 
. 
 blocks have been
accounted for in the catalog record's data fork. These are blocks 
–
 meaning that the next allocation block number is 
.
9 In this example the content of the file with CNID 
 was copied to a
file called iNode23. The official documentation states that this number is
random and is not the CNID number. Hence the number found here
might not be the actual CNID for the target file; instead, it may be a
random number.
OceanofPDF.com

13
The APFS File System
Apple File System (APFS) was developed by Apple as a replacement for
the HFS+ file system. It was first released, in beta form, in macOS 10.12.4
in 2017 and quickly became standard on all Apple products. It is now the
default file system on all new Apple devices, and many devices that have
been updated to newer versions of Apple operating systems also have the
file system updated to APFS in the background.
HFS+ was originally released in the late 1990s and by the mid‐2010s was
showing its age. During that time many changes occurred in storage
technology. One of the most obvious changes was in the capacity of storage
devices. The great increase in capacity meant that HFS+ was struggling to
support modern devices in their entirety. Another major change was the
prevalence of SSDs over traditional HDDs. The SSD has some features
which can be exploited by file systems, but older systems such as HFS+
were unable to do this. Hence the need for a new APFS.
APFS allows for a number of advanced features which allow it to
outperform HFS+ in terms of both functionality and efficiency. These
features include:
‐bit Inodes: Inodes are now represented using 
‐bit addresses
(although only 
 bits are used for the inode number, the remaining
four bits are used to describe the type of object). This allows for a vast
increase in the number of possible files on an APFS volume when
compared to the 
‐bit CNIDs used in HFS+.
Encryption: APFS provides for encryption at the file system level.
This can be achieved at whole disk or single file level. Potentially this
makes APFS more difficult to analyse than the HFS+ file system in
which encryption had to be added at a higher level.
Snapshots: APFS supports snapshot creation. In particular ‘read‐only’
snapshots can be created for backup purposes with very little overhead.

This also has implications for the forensic process as there is potential
to recover older versions of the file system through these snapshots.
Sparse Files: APFS provides sparse file support, in which blocks of
zeros in file content are not stored on disk. This feature results in more
efficient use of space in APFS when compared with HFS+.
Space Sharing: APFS containers consist of a number of volumes (see
Section 13.1.4). Every volume in the container shares space in the
container.
Checksums: All APFS structures support checksums in order to
provide improved reliability.
Crash Protection: APFS does not update metadata; instead, it uses
copy‐on‐write (CoW) to create a new instance of the metadata
structure, updates that and changes the pointer. This ensures the file
system will never be left in an inconsistent state.
Checkpoints: APFS creates a number of automatic checkpoints. This
allows for historical views of the file system to be obtained. However,
these checkpoints are overwritten quickly and may not be of great use
to an investigator.
The use of checkpoints and snapshots in APFS means that potentially, from
a file system forensics perspective, there is more chance to recover previous
file system states. Consider the case of HFS+ (and other systems using B‐
Tree structures), in which tree balancing means that metadata structures are
overwritten. This means that older information is quickly lost. However, in
APFS, the checkpoints and snapshots protect older information from
deletion. While no longer available in the current file system, the automated
checkpoints (of which there are many in APFS) will often protect historical
information. Both metadata and content can be protected in this way.
13.1 On‐Disk Structures
The general layout of an APFS container is shown in Figure 13.1. The
container superblock (CSB) exists in sector 
 on the device and contains
information about the container as a whole. This CSB should theoretically
be the latest version of the CSB, but other CSBs are also found on the

device.These are found in the checkpoint area in the container which
follows immediately after the primary CSB. The CSB in block 
 is
generally used only to locate the latest CSB in the checkpoint area. This is
the CSB that is used to mount the file system.
Figure 13.1 APFS container structure.
Following the checkpoint area the container contains the space manager.
The purpose of the space manager is to manage the allocation of blocks
throughout the entire container. There is a single space manager area in the
container which has responsibility for all space. Due to the possibilities for

multiple volumes in a single APFS container, the space manager might be
responsible for allocation of blocks in more than one volume. All other
information in APFS (volumes, file content, metadata etc.) can appear
anywhere following the space manager area.
This section examines some of those structures vital for the analysis of the
APFS file system. Unless otherwise noted all values in the APFS file
system are stored in little‐endian format.
13.1.1 Time in APFS
APFS uses a 
‐bit unsigned timestamp value which records the number
of nanosecond intervals (
 s) since the Unix epoch (1 January 1970).
This provides for much better granularity than that provided for in HFS+
(and indeed by Unix time itself) and also provides for a better range of time
values. The final representable time value in this system occurs in July 2554
as opposed to February 2106 for unsigned 
‐bit Unix time.1 Timestamps
in APFS are stored in UTC.
13.1.2 Objects
Almost all items in the APFS file system, except for the bitmap structure,
are stored as objects. Every object is identified by an object identifier
(OID). There are three types of OID reflecting three different object
storage/addressing mechanisms. These are physical, virtual and ephemeral.
In the case of physical OIDs, these objects are stored at a known block
address on disk. It is this block address that is used as the object's OID.
These objects are the easiest to locate in the file system, merely requiring
access to the block number that corresponds to the object's OID. However,
physical OIDs are not constant across an object's lifetime. When a change is
made to a physical object in APFS, the use of copy‐on‐write (CoW) means
that a new copy of the object is created. This will reside at a different
physical address and as such it will have a different OID to that of the
original. Hence every change made to a physical object results in a new
OID for that object.
Objects with a virtual OID are also found on disk. The OIDs of these
objects do not correspond to a physical location. In order to locate an object

from a virtual OID the OID must be translated to a physical block address.
This is done through an object map structure. Each APFS container will
have multiple object map structures each with different scope. Every
container will have a container object map and at least one object map for
every volume in the container. When a modification occurs to an object
with a virtual OID a copy of the object is created (again due to CoW) but in
this case the OID remains constant (as it is virtual). Instead the XID
(transaction identifier) is updated. This value is used to locate the desired
version of the OID in question. After the modification is complete, and the
object's copy is created, the relevant object map structure is updated to
show the new physical location of the virtual object.
The third type of object is an ephemeral object. These are not stored on‐disk
as are objects with physical and virtual OIDs. Instead they are stored in
memory for a mounted container. When the container is unmounted these
objects will be written to the checkpoint data area. These objects are
modified in‐place, in other words they don't use CoW. This is because they
reside in main memory and are only stored in checkpoints on disk. During
traditional digital forensic analysis ephemeral objects will be found only in
the checkpoint area. However, these objects may be encountered during
memory forensics as they exist in RAM.
All objects, regardless of purpose or type, consist of a 
‐byte header
followed by the object itself. The structure of this object header is shown in
Table 13.1.

Table 13.1 APFS object header structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x08 Checksum A variant of Fletcher's checksum calculated over
the block's contents (less these 
 bytes).
0x08
0x08 OID
The object's identifier.
0x10
0x08 XID
The transaction ID (XID) is the version number of
the object which is incremented when the object is
updated.
0x18
0x02 Type
The object type. There are 
 object types (see
Apple File System Reference). Some of the more
important types for digital forensics include:
0x01: Container superblock;
0x02: B‐Tree;
0x03: B‐Tree node;
0x0B: Object map;
0x0C: Checkpoint map;
0x0D: Volume superblock;
0x0E: File system B‐Tree.
0x1A 0x02 Flags
Flags are used in the object header to provide
additional information about the current object.
The values for the flags are:
0x0000: Virtual OID;
0x4000: Physical OID;
0x8000: Ephemeral OID;
0x2000: No header;
0x1000: Encrypted;
0x0800: Non‐persistent.
0x1C 0x02 Subtype
The object's subtype. These values are the same as
those in the object‐type field.
0x1E
0x02 Padding
Padding values (0x00).

The object header describes the type/subtype of the object in question. The
subtype is used in the case of a structure which can hold many different
types. For instance a B‐Tree is used in APFS to store both object maps and
file systems (along with other data). In both cases the object type will be
0x02 (for the root node) or 0x03 (for non‐root nodes). This alone does not
allow these structures to be distinguished. Hence in these cases the subtype
is also used. The object map will have a subtype of 0x0B (object map)
while the file system B‐Tree's subtype will be 0x0E (file system B‐Tree).
The flags in the object header are used to determine how the object is
stored. The value shows whether they are physical, virtual or ephemeral.
Flags can also provide other information. For instance the flag 0x8800
represents a non‐persistent ephemeral object. This object is never written to
disk, even in a checkpoint. This flag should never be encountered in
traditional digital forensics. A flag value of 0x1000 means that the object is
encrypted, while 0x2000 means the object has no header. This no header
flag will obviously not be encountered in the object header structure, but it
can be encountered in other areas (for instance information about bitmaps
will generally have this flag set!).
13.1.3 B‐Trees
As with many modern file systems APFS uses B‐Tree structures to store
much of the file system information. B‐Trees are balanced trees that store
information in an ordered form and allow for quick searching for desired
information. The basic structure of a B‐Tree is shown in Figure 13.2.

Figure 13.2 APFS B‐Tree structure.
There are three types of node in APFS B‐Trees. These are:
Root Nodes: There will always exist a single root node in every B‐
Tree. This node exists at the highest level of the tree (level 2 in Figure
13.2). Depending on the size of the B‐Tree the root node will also
serve as either an index or leaf node.
Index Nodes: Index nodes contain pointers to other nodes in the tree.
As with all B‐Trees the keys in APFS index nodes (and indeed all
nodes) are sorted which allows quick location of the desired child node
and hence location of the content of interest.
Leaf Nodes: Leaf nodes contain the actual data in the tree. The type of
data depends on the B‐Tree's purpose. For instance the file system tree
(subtype: 0x0E) will contain inode and extent structures, while the
object map tree (subtype: 0x0B) will contain mappings from virtual
OIDs to physical locations on disk.
Almost all nodes, regardless of type, share a common structure shown in
Figure 13.3. This shows a B‐Tree root node. Non‐root nodes are identical to
this structure, except that they do not include the B‐Tree info structure at
the node's tail.

Figure 13.3 APFS B‐Tree (root) node structure. ToC is the node's table of
contents.
The various areas present in the B‐Tree node include:
Node Header: This area provides information about the structure of
the node. The structure of the node header is shown in Table 13.2.
Table of Contents: The table of contents (ToC) provides the locations
for the keys and values that are present in the tree node. It allows the
association of keys and values and also access to the actual data.
Keys: The keys are used for sorting the tree. It is this area that is
searched if a particular file is sought. The ordering of keys in a B‐Tree
allows for very efficient searching (although inserts can be much
slower). Keys are stored directly after the ToC.
Values: Values are stored at the end of the node. In the case of root
node the values are located immediately before the B‐Tree info
structure. In non‐root nodes values are located at the very end of the
node block.
Free Space: Keys fill from the beginning of the node and values fill
from the end of the node. Generally there exists free space between
these two areas.
B‐Tree Info: This structure is found only in root nodes and contains
information about the tree as a whole.
When a B‐Tree node is encountered during analysis processing begins at
the node header. The structure of the node header is shown in Table 13.2.

Table 13.2 APFS B‐Tree node header structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x20 Object
Header
The generic object header structure (see Table
13.1).
0x20
0x02 Flags
Flag values:
0x0001: Root node;
0x0002: Leaf node;
0x0004: Fixed key‐value size;
0x0008: Hashed;
0x0010: No header;
0x8000: Transient.
0x22
0x02 Level
The number of child levels below this node. For a
leaf node this value is 0x00. Referring to Figure
13.2 the root node would be level 0x02, the index
nodes 0x01 and the leaves 0x00.
0x24
0x04 Num.
Keys
The number of keys in this node.
0x28
0x02 ToC
Offset
The byte offset to the table of contents structure.
This value is relative to the end of the node
header (0x38 bytes).
0x2A 0x02 ToC
Length
The length of the table of contents in bytes.
0x2C 0x02 Free
Space
Offset
The byte offset to the free space area relative to
the end of the node header.
0x2E
0x02 Free
Space
Length
The length of the free space area in bytes.
0x30
0x02 Free Key
List Offset
The byte offset to the free key list relative to the
end of the node header.
0x32
0x02 Free Key
List
The length of the free key list in bytes.

Offset Size Name
Description
Length
0x34
0x02 Free Value
List Offset
The byte offset to the free value list relative to the
end of the node header.
0x36
0x02 Free Value
List
Length
The length of the free value list in bytes.
The information provided by the node header will allow for all the
structures in the node to be located. This means that each area in Figure
13.3 can be identified. The free key and free value lists provide the offsets
to the next free space (for keys and values, respectively). These are used
when new key value pairs are added to the node.
In the case of a root node the final 
 bytes of the node form the B‐Tree
info structure. This structure contains information about the B‐Tree as a
whole. The structure of this is provided in Table 13.3.

Table 13.3 B‐Tree info structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Flags
Flags related to this B‐Tree. The values include:
0x01: Optimised comparisons;
0x02: Sequential insert;
0x04: Allow ghosts;
0x08: Ephemeral OIDs for children;
0x10: Physical OIDs for children;
0x20: B‐Tree does not persist;
0x40: Unaligned key values;
0x80: Index nodes store hashes;
0x100: No object header.
0x04
0x04 Node Size The size of each node in bytes.
0x08
0x04 Key Size
The size of keys in this B‐Tree. A value of 0x00
means that keys are variable sized.
0x0C 0x04 Value Size The size of values in this B‐Tree. A value of 0x00
means that values are variable sized.
0x10
0x04 Longest
Key
The byte length of the longest key that has ever
been stored in this B‐Tree.
0x14
0x04 Longest
Value
The byte length of the longest value that has ever
been stored in this B‐Tree.
0x18
0x08 Key Count The number of keys in this B‐Tree.
0x20
0x08 Node
Count
The number of nodes in this B‐Tree.
The next step in processing the node is to get the locations of the keys and
values. This is done by processing the Table of Contents (ToC) structure.
Before doing this it is necessary to determine the type of keys/values being
used. Referring to the flags in the node header (Table 13.2), a flag value of
0x0004 means that keys and values are of fixed length. In this case the B‐
Tree info structure (Table 13.3) is used to determine the key/value sizes. In
the case of fixed key value sizes the ToC entries are structured as key

offset/value offset pairs. This structure is given in Table 13.4. In the case
where the key/value lengths are not fixed, the structure is slightly more
complex as the key and value lengths must be included. This is given in
Table 13.5.
Table 13.4 ToC entry structure for fixed length key value pairs.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Key
Offset
The byte offset to the key. This offset is relative to
the end of the table of contents.
0x02
0x02 Value
Offset
The byte offset to the value. This offset is relative to
the start of the B‐Tree info structure (for root nodes)
or to the end of the node (for non‐root nodes). This
offset is subtracted from the designated point!
Table 13.5 ToC entry structure when handling variable length keys and
values.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x02 Key
Offset
The byte offset to the key. This offset is relative to
the end of the table of contents.
0x02
0x02 Key
Length
The length of the key in bytes.
0x04
0x02 Value
Offset
The byte offset to the value. This offset is relative to
the start of the B‐Tree info structure (for root nodes)
or to the end of the node (for non‐root nodes). This
offset is subtracted from the designated point!
0x06
0x02 Value
Length
The length of the value in bytes.
The processing of the ToC allows the keys and values to be located. The
key/value structure is dependent on the type of tree that is being used. These
structures will be covered later in this chapter.

13.1.4 Containers and Volumes
APFS introduces a new concept to file systems, that of the container. When
an APFS file system is created (Section 13.2.1) it is actually a top‐level
container that is being created. This container can contain multiple volumes,
which can be used to store files. Volumes in the same container share space
in that container. The container stores all information about the volume
locations and also stores information about all structures that are common
to all volumes. Each container has a superblock object found at block 
 in
the container (Section 13.1.5). Data blocks in the container are shared
between all the volumes present in the container.
13.1.5 Container Superblock
All analysis begins at the CSB which is found in block 0 of the container.
This object contains information about the entire APFS container such as
block size, number of blocks and checkpoint information. The CSB is an
APFS object and as such the first 0x20 bytes consist of an object header
(Table 13.1). The type code that should be found in the CSB object header
is 0x01. Table 13.6 provides the structure of the CSB itself.

Table 13.6 APFS container superblock structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x20 Object
Header
An object header structure (Table 13.1).
0x20
0x04 Signature
Four character signature value (NXSB).
0x24
0x04 Block
Size
The size of each block in bytes.
0x28
0x08 Block
Count
The total number of blocks in the container.
0x30
0x08 Features
A bit field representing the optional container
features in use. Containers can still be mounted
even if the implementation does not support these
features.
0x38
0x08 RO
Compat.
Features
Read‐only compatible features in use in this
volume. Containers can be mounted read‐only if
the implementation does not support these
features.
0x40
0x08 Incompat.
Features
Incompatible features bit field. If the
implementation doesn't support one of these
features then the volume cannot be mounted.
0x48
0x10 UUID
The universally unique identifier for this
container.
0x58
0x08 Next OID The next object identifier to be used for a virtual
or ephemeral object. Physical objects' OIDs are
given by the actual physical address in which the
object is located.
0x60
0x08 Next XID The next transaction identifier to be used.
0x68
0x04 Desc.
Blocks
The number of blocks used in the checkpoint
descriptor area. The most significant bit should be
ignored for calculating the number of blocks.
This bit is used as a flag. If the bit is zero the
checkpoint descriptor is contiguous and the
descriptor base value points to the start of the

Offset Size Name
Description
area. Otherwise the area is fragmented and
descriptor base gives the physical OID of a B‐
Tree whose values are physical size and block
numbers.
0x6C 0x04 Data
Blocks
The number of blocks in the checkpoint data area.
The most significant bit is used as a flag
(meaning as in the descriptor blocks field).
0x70
0x08 Desc.
Base
Block address of the first block in the checkpoint
descriptor area. If the most significant bit is set
this is the physical OID for a B‐Tree.
0x78
0x08 Data Base Block address of the first block in the checkpoint
data area. If the most significant bit is set this is
the physical OID for a B‐Tree.
0x80
0x04 Desc.
Next
The next index used in the checkpoint descriptor
area.
0x84
0x04 Data Next The next index used in the checkpoint data area.
0x88
0x04 Desc.
Index
The index of the first valid item in the checkpoint
descriptor area.
0x8C 0x04 Desc.
Length
The number of blocks in the checkpoint
descriptor area used by the checkpoint this
superblock points to.
0x90
0x04 Data
Index
The index of the first valid item in the checkpoint
data area.
0x94
0x04 Data
Length
The number of blocks in the checkpoint data area
used by the checkpoint that this superblock
belongs to.
0x98
0x08 Spaceman
OID
The ephemeral OID for the space manager.
0xA0 0x08 Object
Map OID
The physical OID for the container's object map
structure.
0xA8 0x08 Reaper
OID
The ephemeral OID for the reaper.

Offset Size Name
Description
0xB0 0x04 Unused
This should always be zero. Officially it can be
used for testing purposes but Apple
implementations never use it!
0xB4 0x04 Max.
Volumes
(n)
The maximum number of volumes that can be
stored in this container. This is calculated by
dividing the container size by 512 MiB and then
rounding up. However, this value can never
exceed the NX_MAX_FILE_SYSTEMS value
which is generally 
.
0xB8 0x08
* n
Volume
OID
An array of virtual OIDs for volumes. The size of
this structure is determined by the maximum
volumes value. The objects represent volume
superblocks.
In order to analyse an APFS container the CSB is the first structure
processed. This structure provides much information that is required in
order to analyse the file system. Some of the information that must be
recovered includes the following:
Object Header: This is required to confirm that the structure is a
container superblock (Type: 0x01).
Magic Value: This is used along with the object's type to confirm it is
a container superblock. The value should be NXSB.
Block Size: The size in bytes of each block. Physical addresses are
given in terms of block number; hence, the size of a block is required
to get to the correct location in the container.
UUID: From an investigative point of view the UUID may be used to
determine if a device was attached to a particular computer.
Checkpoint Descriptor and Data Area locations: There are a
number of fields which allow the checkpoint descriptor and data areas
to be located. These include descriptor blocks and descriptor base and
data blocks and database.

OMAP OID: This is the OID for the object map structure. This is a
physical OID. The object map is used to map virtual to physical
addresses.
Max File Systems: The maximum number of file systems informs the
size of the FS_OID array. All locations in this array should be tested to
see if they contain a FS_OID item. If so (i.e. the value is non zero)
there is a volume present.
FS_OID[]: The virtual OIDs of the volume roots.
When analysing an APFS container the next step is to process the container
object map structure. This will allow all the volume root structures to be
located. Hence the object map OID is a physical OID, as it is necessary to
locate this structure without using the object map itself. The file system
OIDs (FS_OID[]) are virtual OIDs. This is why the object map must be
processed in order to map these virtual OIDs to physical block addresses.
13.1.6 Volume Superblock
Every APFS volume contains a volume superblock structure which provides
information relating to a particular volume. The first step in processing a
volume is to process the volume superblock (VSB) structure itself. The
structure of the VSB is given in Table 13.7.

Table 13.7 APFS volume superblock structure.
Offset Size
Name
Description
0x00
0x20
Object
Header
An object header structure.
0x20
0x04
Magic
Signature value (APSB).
0x24
0x04
FS Index
Volume index in the CSB's FS_OID array.
0x28
0x08
Features
The optional features in use in this volume.
The volume can still be mounted even if the
implementation does not support these.
0x30
0x08
RO
Compat.
Features
A bit field of features that are read‐only
compatible. If the implementation does not
support one or more of these the volume
should be mounted read only.
0x38
0x08
Incompat.
Features
A bit field of incompatible features. If the
implementation does not support one or more
of these the volume should not be mounted.
0x40
0x08
Unmount
Time
The time the volume was last unmounted.
0x48
0x08
Reserved
Block
Count
The number of blocks reserved for this volume
to allocate.
0x50
0x08
Quota
Block
Count
The maximum number of blocks that this
volume can allocate.
0x58
0x08
Allocated
Count
The number of blocks that are currently
allocated to this volume.
0x60
0x14
Crypto
Information about encryption.
0x74
0x04
Root Tree
Type
The root tree type.
0x78
0x04
Extent Tree
Type
The extent tree type.

Offset Size
Name
Description
0x7C
0x04
Snapshot
Tree Type
The snapshot tree type.
0x80
0x08
OMAP OID Physical OID of volume object map.
0x88
0x08
Root Tree
OID
Virtual OID of file system tree root node.
0x90
0x08
Extent Tree
OID
Physical OID of extent reference tree.
0x98
0x08
Snapshot
Tree OID
Virtual OID of snapshot metadata tree.
0xA0 0x08
Revert to
XID
The transaction ID (XID) of a snapshot that
this volume reverts to.
0xA8 0x08
Revert to
OID
The physical OID of the volume superblock
that the volume reverts to.
0xB0
0x08
Next OID
The next OID that will be assigned to a file
system object in this volume.
0xB8
0x08
Num. Files
The number of regular files in this volume.
0xC0
0x08
Num.
Directories
The number of directories in this volume.
0xC8
0x08
Num.
Symlinks
The number of symbolic links in this volume.
0xD0 0x08
Num. Other
FS Objects
The number of other files in this volume. This
includes anything that is not a regular file,
directory or symbolic link. This might include
sockets, character/block devices, etc.
0xD8 0x08
Num.
Snapshots
The number of snapshots in this volume.
0xE0
0x08
Total
Blocks
Allocated
The total number of blocks that have been
allocated by this volume. This number does
not decrease when blocks are freed.
0xE8
0x08
Total
Blocks
The total number of blocks that have been
freed by this volume.

Offset Size
Name
Description
Freed
0xF0
0x10
Volume
UUID
The universally unique identifier for this
volume.
0x100 0x08
Last
Modified
Time
The time at which the volume was last
modified.
0x108 0x08
FS Flags
The Volume's flags (see the Apple File System
Reference document for a list of flags).
0x110 0x30
Formatted
By
Information about the software that was used
to create this volume. This field contains a
0x20 byte string that provides the name of the
software. An 0x08 byte timestamp of when the
software last modified the device and an 0x08
byte XID which is the last transaction
identifier of this program's modifications.
0x140 0x30
* 8
Modified
By
Information about the software that has
modified this volume. There is space for eight
items in this (each is 0x30 bytes in size and
has the same structure as the formatted by
field). The newest instance is stored in
position zero of the array – older instances are
shifted upwards.
0x2C0 0x100 Volume
Name
The volume name. This is stored as a NULL
(0x00) terminated UTF‐8 string.
0x3C0 0x04
Next Doc.
ID
Used with the document ID extended attribute.
0x3C4 0x02
Role
See below.
Note there are other items in the VSB structure but they are of little
importance for forensic analysis. For the complete structure see the Apple
File System Reference document.
The following information is generally required when processing the
volume superblock:

Object Header: This provides information about the object as a whole
and is used to confirm it is a volume superblock (Type: 0x0D).
Magic: This is also used, along with the object header type, to confirm
this is a volume superblock. This value should be APSB.
OMap OID: In order to map virtual OIDs to physical blocks it is
necessary to process the object map tree. This value is the physical
OID of this structure. Note this object map is different to the
container's object map structure. Every volume will have its own
object map structure.
Root Tree OID: This value is the root node of the file system B‐Tree
and is where file recovery will commence. This is a virtual OID which
can be mapped to a physical OID using the object map.
The volume superblock contains further information which might be helpful
for an investigation:
Unmount Time: This is the time at which the device was last
unmounted. Assuming this is accurate it gives some indication of when
the device was last used. However, it is dependent on the file system
driver's implementation whether it is updated correctly or not!
FS Statistics: Information about the number of files, number of
directories, etc. may be of interest to the investigation. It can also be
used as a means of ensuring that all files have been recovered from the
device.
Volume UUID: As with the container UUID this value may appear in
logs showing usage of this structure.
Last Modified Time: This value can again show usage of the file
system.
Formatted by and Modified by: These values can show what
software was used to create the device initially and also any software
used to modify the device. Software version numbers might be helpful
in linking the device to a certain OS/computer – although of course
there will be multiple instances of the same version number.

Volume Name: The name of the volume as given when the volume
was created.
Role: This might show if it was a specific system volume. This could
lead to prioritising the device based on the likelihood of finding
evidence in this file system.
13.1.7 Object Maps
Object map structures provide a means of converting a virtual OID into a
physical address of the content block. They are essential in the analysis of
APFS. There are a number of object maps in existence. Firstly there is an
object map at the container level. It is this object map that is used to map
the virtual FS_OID values to physical addresses; in other words, it is used
to find the volume superblocks. However, there is also an object map in
every volume. This is used for volume‐level virtual OIDs.
Object maps store information in a B‐Tree. The first block of an object map
stores information about the object map itself, including the physical OID
for the object map tree's root node. The structure of this block is shown in
Table 13.8. In this B‐Tree structure keys consist of a combination of OID
and XID, while the values contain the 
‐byte physical addresses (i.e.
block offsets) along with some further information (the structure of these
values is given in Table 13.9).

Table 13.8 The object map structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x20 Object Header
An object header structure (Table 13.1).
0x20
0x04 Flags
Flag values:
0x01: No snapshots;
0x02: Encrypting;
0x04: Decrypting;
0x08: Keyrolling (encryption);
0x10: Crypto generation.
0x24
0x04 Snapshot Count The number of snapshots present in this
object map.
0x28
0x04 Tree Type
The type of tree used for the object map.
0x2C 0x04 Snapshot Tree
Type
The type of tree used for snapshots.
0x30
0x08 Tree OID
Physical OID of object map B‐Tree.
0x38
0x08 Snapshot Tree
OID
Physical OID of snapshot B‐Tree.
0x40
0x08 Most Recent
Snapshot
Transaction ID (XID) of the most recent
snapshot stored in this object map.
0x48
0x08 Pending Revert
Min.
Smallest XID for an in‐progress event.
0x50
0x08 Pending Revert
Max.
Largest XID for an in‐progress event.
When analysing the object map information block the following
information is vital:
Object Header: Used to ensure this is an object map information
block.
Tree OID: The physical OID for the actual object map tree itself. It is
here that the actual mappings will be found.

Processing continues by processing the actual object map B‐Tree itself. The
tree is a standard APFS B‐Tree (Section 13.1.3) where the keys are 
bytes consisting of an 
‐byte OID and 
‐byte XID. Object map B‐Tree
values are 
 bytes in size. The structure of these is shown in Table 13.9.
Table 13.9 Structure of the object map B‐Tree values.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Flags
Flags describing the particular mapping. These
are the same as those for the object map structure
itself (Table 13.8).
0x04
0x04 Size
The allocated size of the object in bytes. This is
always a multiple of the block size (found in the
CSB).
0x08
0x08 Physical
Address
Physical block address of the object.
The object mapping is constructed by combining the keys and values. The
key OID is the virtual OID for the object. The value's physical address field
contains the physical block at which the key's virtual OID is located.
13.1.8 File‐Related Structures
Each APFS volume has a file system tree. The virtual OID of this tree is
found in the volume superblock. This can then be mapped to a physical
block address using the volume object map. APFS uses a B‐Tree structure
to store file related information. This includes inodes (containing file
metadata), directory records (showing the files present in a directory) and
extents (allowing data content to be located) along with a number of other
records. This section examines some of these structures.
Processing of the file system tree is the fundamental task in file system
forensics. This structure allows files to be listed and also allows for
metadata and content recovery. Hence, knowledge of this structure is vital
for all digital forensic analysts.

13.1.8.1 File System Keys
As the file system information is stored in a tree, it consists of key‐value
pairs. Most file related structures have a similar key structure. This section
presents the key structure most commonly encountered in the file system
tree. Deviations from this generic file system key structure are provided
when appropriate.
The default key is a simple 
 byte structure which contains a bit field
representing the Object type and OID (
). In order to access the actual
type and OID, minor calculations are performed on the 
‐byte value. The
Apple File System Reference document defines two constants that are used
in these calculations. These are:
OBJ_ID_MASK (
): This mask has a value of
0x0FFFFFFFFFFFFFFF and is used to determine the OID from the
complex structure.
OBJ_TYPE_MASK (
): This mask has a value of
0xF000000000000000 and is used to determine the object type from
the complex structure.
The following formulae show how these are used in calculation. Equation
13.1 shows the calculation of the OID (
) from the complex value. This
is achieved by performing a binary AND operation using the
OBJ_ID_MASK value. The result of this provides the OID. Similarly
Equation 13.2 shows the calculation of the object‐type value (
). This
involves a binary AND operation with the OBJ_TYPE_MASK value, the
result of which is then right‐shifted 
 positions. The meaning of the
object‐type values is given in Table 13.10.

(13.1)
(13.2)
Table 13.10 Object‐type codes for file system tree keys.
Code Type
Code Type
0x0
Any: A record of any type.
Only used for testing.
0x8
File Extent: A physical extent
record for a file. This allows
the file's content to be located.
0x1
Snapshot metadata.
0x9
Directory Record: A directory
entry recording information on
the file's presence in a
directory.
0x2
Extent: A physical extent
record.
0xA
Directory Statistics:
Information about a directory.
0x3
Inode record: This structure
allows for metadata recovery.
0xB
Snapshot name.
0x4
XAttr: An extended attribute. 0xC
Sibling Map: A mapping from a
hard link to a target.
0x5
Sibling Link: A mapping
from an inode to hard links
of which the inode is the
target.
0xD
File Info: Additional
information about a file.
0x6
DStream: A data stream
object.
0xF
Invalid: An invalid object type.
0x7
Crypto State: Information
about file encryption.
When listing files in an APFS volume the object ID shown here is the actual
inode number used by the file system.
13.1.8.2 Inode
Inodes are one of the most important structures in performing file system
forensics. The inode structure contains all the metadata about a file. This

includes time information, file size, owners, etc. The inode structure in
APFS uses the generic file system key shown in the previous section. The
inode value structure is provided in Table 13.11.

Table 13.11 APFS inode structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x08 Parent ID
Parent directory inode.
0x08
0x08 Private ID
Unique ID used by file's data stream.
0x10
0x08 Creation Time
File's creation time.
0x18
0x08 Modification
Time
File's modification time.
0x20
0x08 Change Time
File's metadata change time.
0x28
0x08 Access Time
File's last accessed time.
0x30
0x08 Flags
Flags representing this particular inode.
Values can be found in the Apple File
System Reference Documentation.
0x38
0x04 Num
Children/Links
This field's content is dependent on the file
type. For directory inodes this is the number
of children. For file inodes this is the
number of hard links.
0x3C 0x04 Protection Class The default protection class.
0x40
0x04 Write Gen.
Count
Counter that is incremented every time this
inode or its data is modified. Note that this
value can wrap!
0x44
0x04 BSD Flags
BSD Flags.
0x48
0x04 Owner
The Owner ID of the file's owner (UID).
0x4C 0x04 Group
The group ID (GID) owning the file.
0x50
0x02 Mode
The file mode (Linux permissions).
0x52
0x02 Padding
Reserved.
0x54
0x08 Size
The uncompressed size of the file. This is
zero if the file is compressed.
0x5C ???
Extended Fields This area contains the inode's extended
fields.
Table 13.11 is not the sole provider of metadata. It is also necessary to
process the file mode and extended fields. The file mode is identical to that

encountered in EXT file systems. For details on processing this structure
see Section 8.1.3.1.
Extended fields are used for extra data associated with the inode. Both
inodes and directory records may contain extended fields. To determine if a
record contains an extended field the file system tree node's table of
contents is consulted. If the value length of an inode is greater than 0x5C
bytes the record contains extended fields. Similarly if the value length of a
directory record in the table of contents is greater than 0x12 bytes the entry
contains extended fields.
The structure of the extended fields is shown in Figure 13.4. The extended
field area is composed of three parts. The first of these is the extended field
information structure. This provides information about all the extended
fields present in this area. The structure of this is provided in Table 13.12.
This is followed by an array of items providing information about each
individual extended field. The number of elements in this array is the total
number of extended fields present in the record. The structure of these
entries is provided in Table 13.12. Finally the extended field area contains
the data array. Again this area contains one entry per extended field in the
record. The structure of this data is dependent on the type of record in
question. The various extended field type values are shown in Table 13.13.

Figure 13.4 Extended field structure.
Table 13.12 Extended field information structure.
Offset Size Name Description
0x00
0x01 Type
The extended field's data type (Table 13.13).
0x01
0x01 Flags Extended field's flags. Values for these can be found in
the Apple File System Reference document.
0x02
0x02 Size
The size in bytes of the stored data in the extended
field. Note that as attributes are aligned to 
‐byte
boundaries, the next field may not start immediately
after the preceding field.

Table 13.13 Extended field data‐type values.
Value Type
Value Type
0x1
Sibling ID if found in a
directory record. Snapshot ID
if found in an inode.
0x9
Reserved.
0x2
Virtual OID of the snapshot
extent delta list.
0xA
Directory statistics.
0x3
The file's document identifier. 0xB
Reserved.
0x4
File Name. The data is a null
(0x00) terminated UTF‐8
encoded string.
0xC
Reserved.
0x5
Previous file size.
0xD
Sparse Bytes: The number of
sparse bytes in the data
stream.
0x6
Reserved.
0xE
RDev: Device identifier for a
block or character device.
0x7
Finder info.
0xF
Reserved.
0x8
Data stream.
0x10 Synchronisation root.
The two most commonly encountered extended fields in inodes are that of
filename (type 0x4) and data stream (type 0x8). The filename structure is
trivial, it is merely a null (0x00) terminated UTF‐8 string. The data stream
structure is more complex and is shown in Table 13.14. The data stream
allows for the actual file size, along with other information, to be obtained.

Table 13.14 Extended field data stream structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x08 Size (Actual)
Size (in bytes) of the data.
0x08
0x08 Size (Allocated)
Allocated size (in bytes) of the data.
0x10
0x08 Crypto ID
Default encryption key used.
0x18
0x08 Total Bytes
Written
Total number of bytes written to this data
stream.
0x20
0x08 Total Bytes Read Total number of bytes read from the data
stream.
The inode structure, along with its extended fields, allows all metadata to be
recovered. This includes the various timestamps associated with the file,
along with the filename (in the file name extended field), the file size (in the
data stream extended field), owner and group information.
13.1.8.3 Directory Record
Directory records store information about the file's that are present in a
directory (and also the time that they were added to the directory). The
directory record key is formed from the OID followed by a four‐byte name
length and hash value.2 This structure uses the least significant 
 bits as
the length and the remaining 
 bits as a hash value. This is followed by
the null‐terminated file name. The directory record value structure is given
in Table 13.15.

Table 13.15 Directory record structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x08 File ID
The inode of the file that this record represents.
0x08
0x08 Date Added The time that this directory record was added to
the directory.
0x10
0x02 Flags
Directory Entry Flags: These provide the file
type. The following values are possible:
0x00: Unknown;
0x01: FIFO;
0x02: Character device;
0x04: Directory;
0x06: Block device;
0x08: Regular file;
0x0A: Link;
0x0C: Socket;
s0x0E: WHT.
0x12
???
Extended
Fields
Identical to the extended fields found in the
inode structure.
Notice that the directory record structure provides further temporal
information in relation to files. The timestamp located in the directory
record is the time at which the record was added to the directory; in other
words, the time at which the file was created in this directory. This time
might represent file creation or a copy/move operation.
13.1.8.4 Extent
The final piece of information that is required is the file's content. The file
system B‐Tree contains file extent records. These are used to locate the
file's contents. Extents are commonly used in many modern file systems.
The extent gives a starting block and a number of blocks. Multiple extents
are encountered if a file is fragmented.

The key for the file extent record consists of the OID and the logical
starting point in the file. Consider the case in which three keys are present
for a file (Inode Number 0x15). The keys are:
Inode: 0x15 AND Logical Address 0x00;
Inode: 0x15 AND Logical Address 0x20;
Inode: 0x15 AND Logical Address 0x30.
The first key points to the extent which contains the first 0x20 blocks of the
data starting at logical block 0x00. The number of blocks can be determined
by checking the logical address in the subsequent key. The second points to
the value that contains the next 0x10 blocks of data, and the final key points
to the extent value which contains the remaining data. Notice that the
sorting order will mean extents appear in the B‐Tree in the order they need
to be processed!
The file extent value structure is provided in Table 13.16.
Table 13.16 File extent value structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x08 Length/Flags Length and Flags Bitfield: Currently there are
no flags defined for this value so the entire
value can be used as the length in bytes!
Strictly speaking the value should be AND'd
with 0x00FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF to get the
length and AND'd with
0xFF0000000000000000 and right‐shifted 56
places to get the flags. The length is given in
bytes but is always a multiple of the block size.
0x08
0x08 Physical
Block Num.
The physical block number at which the extent
starts.
0x10
0x08 Crypto ID
Encryption key information.

13.1.9 Checkpoints
Checkpoints are used extensively in APFS to ensure file system integrity
and implement copy‐on‐write updating. This means that it is possible to
find older versions of structures in APFS file systems. The container
superblock is immediately followed by a checkpoint descriptor area and a
checkpoint data area. The starting locations and size of these are determined
from the container superblock. Figure 13.5 shows the general layout of this
area.


Figure 13.5 APFS container structure showing the checkpoint descriptor
and data areas.
The locations of the data area are found in the container superblock itself.
The checkpoint descriptor area contains a checkpoint mapping structure
(which maps ephemeral objects to their place in the checkpoint data area)
and a container superblock. The checkpoint mapping block begins with two
four byte fields immediately after the object header. These are the flags and
the number of checkpoint mappings in the block. Note the checkpoint map
may contain more than one single block. The only valid flag is 0x01. If this
is set the current block is the last block in the checkpoint map. If this is not
set then the next block contains more checkpoint maps.
This is followed by an array of checkpoint maps each of which follows the
structure shown in Table 13.17.
Table 13.17 Checkpoint mapping structure.
Offset Size Name
Description
0x00
0x04 Type/Flags
The object type – the low 16 bits indicate the
type and the high 16 bits represent the flags
(see Section 13.1.2).
0x04
0x04 Subtype
The object subtype (see Section 13.1.2).
0x08
0x04 Size
The object size in bytes.
0x0C 0x04 Padding
Reserved.
0x10
0x08 FS OID
Virtual OID of the volume the object is
associated with.
0x18
0x08 OID
Ephemeral OID for this object.
0x20
0x08 Physical
Address
The physical address in the checkpoint data
area where this object is stored.
The combination of copy‐on‐write and checkpointing means that much
information can be found from older versions of file systems. For instance,
consider a volume's file system tree. If a change is made to that structure a
new, modified copy will be created (copy‐on‐write) but the old copy is still
present. Checkpointing means that checkpoints are routinely created during
the system, so not only is the older version of the file system tree present on

disk, it is also still allocated as it is part of a checkpoint! This means that
older versions of the file system can be recovered in APFS. The recovery of
these checkpoints will be discussed further in Section 13.3.2.
13.1.10 Other APFS Structures
There are a number of other APFS artefacts that are of interest but generally
less relevant to digital forensics. This section briefly introduces some of
these artefacts including the space manager and the reaper.
The space manager is responsible for maintaining the allocation status of
blocks in the file system. It can also be used to pre‐allocate blocks for
certain files. The space manager keeps track of the allocation status of all
blocks in the file system.
The reaper allows large objects to be deleted over multiple transactions.
This improves efficiency in the file system. The deletion of a large object
will not affect other file operations in the file system.
13.2 Analysis of APFS
This section examines the analysis methods that are required for the
successful analysis of the APFS file system. Unlike other file systems APFS
is not supported by Sleuth Kit, and as such it is not possible to verify
findings. This section begins with an overview of the creation of APFS file
systems on macOS and then introduces some of the supplied file systems.
Section 13.2.3 introduces the manual analysis of APFS from the gathering
of container and volume information to file and metadata recovery.
13.2.1 Creating APFS File Systems
In order to create an APFS file system macOS is generally used. At the time
of writing there is no write support for APFS on Linux.3 Listing 13.1 shows
the command to create an APFS container on /dev/disk5 in macOS. Note
that the disk utility app can also be used.

The diskutil command is used to perform many operations on physical
devices in macOS. The command is provided a verb, in this case
partitionDisk, which partitions the disk and creates a file system. In order
to use APFS the GPT partitioning scheme must be specified. APFS will not
function with MBR or other partitioning schemes. The second line in the
command provided in Listing 13.1 relates to the partition/file system itself.
In this case the file system type is provided, apfs, followed by the file
system name, APFS‐FS. Finally the size of the file system is given as
512M. The final line is provided to ensure that the remaining space on the
device is kept free. This is achieved through creating a dummy partition/file
system. During initial file system creation failure to do this resulted in a file
system which occupied the entire device, not just the 512M provided to the
command.
13.2.2 Supplied APFS Image Files
Table 13.18 shows the supplied disk images in this lesson. Analysis will
commence with the APFS_V1.E01 image file. This contains a simple APFS
volume which was created on macOS 12.6. A single volume (APFS‐FS)
was created in this container to which a single user directory and four files
were added. The initial manual analysis of APFS will analyse this image
and attempt to recover a file along with its associated metadata.

Table 13.18 Supplied APFS container images.
Filename
Description
APFS_V1.E01 A simple APFS container with one volume containing a
single user‐created directory and four files. There are also
a number of macOS system files on the device.
APFS_V2.E01 Two files were deleted (and trash emptied) from
APFS_V1.E01 to create this disk image.
APFS_V3.E01 This contains many files meaning that multi‐layer B‐Trees
are required for storage of all metadata.
APFS_V4.E01 This image contains an APFS container with two volumes.
APFS_V5.E01 An APFS file system with hard and soft links.
The subsequent images are used to demonstrate some advanced topics in
the analysis of APFS. In APFS_V2.E01 two files have been deleted from
the original APFS_V1.E01 file system. The file system in APFS_V3.E01
contains many files which require the use of multi‐layer B‐Trees for
metadata storage and is used to demonstrate searching the file system tree
for particular entries. APFS_V4.E01 contains two volumes to show the
method of processing multi‐volume containers. Finally, APFS_V5.E01
contains a hard and soft link.
13.2.3 APFS Manual Analysis
This section presents a method to manually analyse an APFS container.
There are a number of steps that need to be performed during analysis in
order to recover files and metadata. This process involves:
1. Process the Container Superblock: The container superblock
provides general information about the container as a whole.
Additionally it provides the locations of the various volume roots, but
these OIDs are virtual. The CSB is also required to locate the container
object map.
2. Process the Container Object Map: The container object map
provides a means of mapping virtual OIDs to physical block addresses
in order to locate the volume roots. Processing the container object

map (indeed processing of all object maps) is a two‐step process. The
object map is used to locate the object map B‐Tree which is then
processed to determine the mappings from OID to physical address.
3. Process the Volume Superblock: For each volume located in the
container superblock the volume superblock is then processed. This
structure provides the virtual OID of the file system tree. In order to
map this to a physical address it is also necessary to determine the
physical OID of the volume's object map structure.
4. Process the Volume Object Map: This is identical to step 2 for the
container‐level object map structure. It allows the root of the file
system tree to be located.
5. Process the file system tree: The task of processing the file system
tree involves listing all files and recovering metadata and content.
The remainder of this section will look at each of these steps in more detail
using APFS_V1.E01 as an exemplar.
13.2.3.1 Process the Container Superblock
Listing 13.2 shows an excerpt from the container superblock structure of
APFS_V1.E01. This listing contains the object header also (first 0x20
bytes). Alternate fields are highlighted. Table 13.19 shows some of the
processed values.

Table 13.19 Partially processed container superblock from APFS_V1.dd.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x08
0x08 OID
0x01 (
)
0x10
0x08 XID
0x08 (
)
0x18
0x02 Type
0x01 (
 – CSB)
0x1A 0x02 Flags
0x8000 (Ephemeral)
0x20
0x04 Magic
NXSB
0x24
0x04 Block Size
0x1000 (
)
0xA0 0x08 Obj. Map OID 0x27E (
)
0xB4 0x04 Max. Volumes 0x
0xB8 0x08 FS_OID[0]
0x402 (
)
The first pieces of key information are required to confirm that this is a
container superblock. This is discovered from two sources: the object
header's type value of 0x01 (Offset: 0x18) and the CSB's magic signature
value of NXSB (Offset: 0x20). The combination of these values along with
the OID of 0x01 (Offset: 0x08) confirm that this structure is indeed the
container superblock.
Following the confirmation of the container superblock it is now possible to
process the CSB in its entirety. Table 13.19 shows the required information
from the CSB in order to perform file system forensic analysis. However, as
shown in Table 13.6 there is much more information present.
Block size is a vital item for continued processing. All physical addresses in
APFS are provided in terms of block offsets. Hence to jump to the exact
position it is necessary to know the size of each block in the file system.
The block size is located at offset 0x24 and has a value of 0x1000 (
)
bytes in Listing 13.2.
The next step is to determine how many volumes are present in the
container and where these are. The maximum number of volumes is found
to be 0x01. The volume roots are located in an array at offset 0xB8. Each
entry in this array is 0x08 bytes in size with one entry per file system max.
value. In the case in Listing 13.2 only a single element in this array has a

value. This volume's superblock has a virtual OID of 0x402 (
). As
this is virtual it must be located in the container's object map structure so
that the physical location on disk can be determined. The physical OID of
the object map is also located in the CSB. In the case of Listing 13.2 this
value is 0x27E (
). This means that the object map structure is located
at byte offset 
.
13.2.3.2 Process the Container Object Map
Having located the container object map from the CSB the next step is to
process this structure in order to determine the location of each volume.
Listing 13.3 shows the contents of the object map structure itself. These
values are processed in Table 13.20.
Table 13.20 Partially processed container object from Listing 13.3.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x08
0x08 OID
0x27E (
)
0x10
0x08 XID
0x08 (
)
0x18
0x02 Type
0x0B (B‐Tree)
0x1A 0x02 Flags
0x4000 (Physical)
0x30
0x08 Tree OID 0x27F (
)
The object map structure is used to locate the root of the object map B‐Tree.
This value, Tree OID, is a physical OID which in this case has the value
0x27F (
). Listing 13.4 shows the object and node headers for this root
tree node. Table 13.21 shows the processed values from this.

Table 13.21 Partially processed object and node headers of the object map
B‐Tree root node (Listing 13.4).
Offset Size Name
Value
0x08
0x08 OID
0x27F (
)
0x10
0x08 XID
0x08 (
)
0x18
0x02 Type
0x02 (Root Node)
0x1A 0x02 OH Flags
0x4000 (Physical)
0x1C 0x04 Subtype
0x0B (Object Map)
0x20
0x02 NH Flags
0x07 (0x04 + 0x02 + 0x01)
0x04: Fixed key‐value size
0x02: Leaf node
0x01: Root node.
0x22
0x02 Level
0x00 (
)
0x24
0x04 Num. Keys 0x01 (
)
0x28
0x02 ToC Offset 0x00 (
)
0x2A 0x02 ToC Length 0x1C0 (
)
The object header informs the analyst that this object is a root node (type
0x02) of an object map tree (subtype 0x0B). The node header flag value is
0x07 – this is 0x01 + 0x02 + 0x04. This means that this node is a root node
(0x01), a leaf node (0x02) and that this node contains fixed key value
lengths (0x04). As expected the level of this node is 0x00 (it has to be as it
is a leaf node!). The node contains only a single key.
The final task is to locate the table of contents for this node. This occurs at
offset 0x00. This offset is relative to the end of the node header (0x38);
hence, the table of contents is found immediately after the node header,

0x38 bytes into the node itself. The table of contents is 0x1C0 bytes in
length. When, at a later stage, the key offsets are located, these key offsets
will be relative to this point.
As this is a root node, the final 0x28 bytes contain a B‐Tree information
structure. The raw data from this area is shown in Listing 13.5 along with
the command used to extract it. The processed values are shown in Table
13.22.
Table 13.22 Partially processed B‐Tree information area from Listing 13.5.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x04 Flags
0x12
Sequential Insert;
Physical OIDs for children.
0x04
0x04 Node Size
0x1000 (
)
0x08
0x04 Key Size
0x10 (
)
0x0C 0x04 Value Size
0x10 (
)
0x18
0x08 Key Count
0x01 (
)
0x20
0x08 Node Count 0x01 (
)
The most important information in the B‐Tree information area in the case
of a node with fixed key value sizes are actual key and value sizes. Table
13.22 shows that both keys and values are of 0x10 bytes in size.
From the node header it was determined that the table of contents starts
immediately after the node header (Offset: 0x00). This means that the table
of contents begins at 0x38. The node header also informs the analyst of the
number of keys in this particular node (0x01). As the keys and values have
a fixed size, each table of contents entry merely consists of a two‐byte key

offset and a two‐byte value offset. The entire table of contents (and the
command used to extract it) is shown in Listing 13.6.
This means that the key can be found at offset 0x00 relative to the end of
the table of contents, and the value can be found at offset 0x10, relative to
the start of the B‐Tree information structure. Remember this value offset
must be subtracted from the starting point! Hence the offset to the key is
given by adding the size of the object header (0x20), the size of the node
header (0x18), the offset to the table of contents (0x00) and the length of
the table of contents (0x1C0). From the B‐Tree information structure the
key length is 0x10 bytes and from Listing 13.6 the offset to the start of the
key is known to be 0x00.
Similarly the value offset (0x10) is relative to the end of the node (or the
start of the B‐Tree information structure in this case). The easiest way to
calculate this value is to take the byte offset to the start of the next block
(0x280 * 0x1000 in this case) and subtract 0x28 (it is a root node) and then
subtract the value offset (0x10). Again the value size is fixed at 0x10 bytes.
Listing 13.7 shows the key and value being extracted from the disk image.
Object map keys are composed of an 
‐byte virtual OID and an 
‐byte
transaction ID (XID). Examining the key in Listing 13.7 shows that this
represents the virtual OID 0x402 and XID 0x08. Returning to the container
superblock the virtual OID of the volume present in this container was
0x402 – hence, the entry for this virtual OID has been found!

The value consists of a four‐byte flag, followed by a four‐byte size. The
final 
 bytes in the value represents the physical address, in this case
0x27D. Hence the object map structure allows the virtual OID 0x402 to be
translated to a physical OID of 0x27D. At this stage the processing of the
volume itself can begin.
13.2.3.3 Process the Volume Superblock
The container superblock shows that there is a single volume present in this
container with a virtual OID of 0x402. The container's object map shows
that this virtual OID maps to a physical block address of 0x27D. The next
step is to process the volume superblock (VSB) found at this location. The
contents of the VSB are shown in Listing 13.8, and the interpretation of
some of this data is shown in Table 13.23. The aim of this exercise is to
locate the file system tree for which the volume object map will need to be
processed.

Table 13.23 Partially processed VSB from Listing 13.8.
Offset Size
Name
Value
0x08
0x08
OID
0x402 (
)
0x10
0x08
XID
0x08 (
)
0x18
0x02
Type
0x0D (VSB)
0x1A 0x02
Flags
0x00 (Virtual)
0x20
0x04
Magic
APSB
0x80
0x08
Object Map OID 0x278 (
)
0x88
0x08
Root Tree OID
0x404 (
)
0xB8
0x08
Num. Files
0x05 (
)
0xC0
0x08
Num. Directories 0x02 (
)
0x2C0 0x100 Volume Name
APFS‐FS
Processing of the VSB shows that the root node of the file system tree has a
virtual OID of 0x404. As this is virtual it must be found in the volume
object map. This structure has the physical OID of 0x278. The next step is
to process the volume object map.
13.2.3.4 Process the Volume Object Map
The structure of the volume object map is identical to that of the container
object map. Processing of this structure is left as an exercise for the reader.
The object map structure itself (block 0x278) shows that the object map B‐
Tree is found at block 0x279. When processing this the flags show that this
node is both a root and a leaf and that it has fixed size keys and values.
Processing of this tree results in three object mappings. Virtual OID 0x404
maps to a physical address of 0x26F, virtual OID 0x406 maps to a physical
address of 0x272 and virtual OID 0x407 maps to a physical address of
0x277. From processing the volume superblock structure the root of the file
system tree is found at a virtual address of 0x404 which corresponds to the
physical block 0x26F. Hence the root of the file system tree will be found in
block 0x26F. The next step in file recovery is to process the file system tree.

13.2.3.5 Process the File System Tree
Listing 13.9 shows the contents of the object and node headers of the
volume's file system tree (Block: 0x26F). A selection of the processed
values is shown in Table 13.24.
Table 13.24 Partially processed object and node headers from Listing 13.9.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x08
0x08 OID
0x404 (
)
0x10
0x08 XID
0x06 (
)
0x18
0x02 Type
0x02 (Root Node)
0x1A 0x02 OH Flags
0x00 (Virtual)
0x1C 0x04 Subtype
0x0E (Files)
0x20
0x02 NH Flags
0x01 – 0x01 (Root)
0x22
0x02 Level
0x01 (
)
0x24
0x04 Num. Keys 0x02 (
)
0x28
0x02 ToC Offset 0x00 (
)
0x2A 0x02 ToC Length 0x40 (
)
This tree consists of multiple levels as the node‐type value is 0x01 meaning
this is a root node. The level of this node is 0x01. This implies that at the
next layer down leaf nodes will be encountered. Another interesting item
from the type value is that it informs that analyst that this node does not
have fixed key and value sizes.
The table of contents is located immediately after the node header (offset
0x00 relative to the end of the node header). This structure contains
information about 0x02 keys which are located in the 0x40 bytes of the
table of contents. Due to variable length keys and values used in the file

system tree the table of contents must be processed using the structure in
Table 13.5 which consists of two bytes for the key offset, two bytes for the
key length, two bytes for the value offset and two bytes for the value length.
Note that as this node does not have fixed key and value sizes it is not
necessary to process the B‐Tree information structure. Listing 13.10 shows
the contents of the 0x40 byte table of contents. These key/value offsets and
lengths are shown in Table 13.25.
Table 13.25 Processed ToC entries from Listing 13.10.
Key
Value
ToC Entry Offset
Size
Offset
Size
1
0x00 (
)
0x18 (
) 0x08 (
)
0x08 (
)
2
0x37 (
) 0x2F (
) 0x10 (
) 0x08 (
)
The contents of the first key are shown in Listing 13.11. All file system
keys begin with an 
‐byte OID and type value (see Section 13.1.8). The
value of this is 0x9000000000000001. Following the calculation presented
earlier the inode number is 0x01 and the type is 0x9. Hence this record
refers to the directory record for inode 0x01 (
).
The value contains the virtual block address of the block containing the
contents related to this key. The contents of the first value are shown in
Listing 13.12. This has the value 0x407. Referring to the volume object
map informs the analyst that the corresponding physical address of this is
0x277.

Processing of the node header in block 0x277 shows it to be a leaf node
with variable length keys and values. Listing 13.13 shows the table of
contents from this node. The highlighted entries all refer to the same file
(OID 0x14) and will be processed in the remainder of this section. The two
unhighlighted entries between the first and second highlighted entries also
refer to the same file but are not necessary for basic analysis and will be
processed later.
ToC Entry 1
Listing 13.14 shows the key for ToC Entry 1. This is found at offset 0x131
relative to the end of the table of contents (
).
The length of this key is 0x08 bytes.
All file system keys begin with an 
‐byte OID and type value (see Section
13.1.8. The value of this is 0x3000000000000014. Following the
calculation presented earlier the inode number is 0x14 and the type is 0x3.
Hence this record refers to the inode record for inode 0x14 (
).

The value (i.e. the inode in this case) is located at offset 0x470 relative to
the end of the tree node.4 The length of this value is 0xA0 bytes; however,
initially only 0x5C bytes are extracted. This is the size of the basic inode
structure. The remaining 
 bytes contain extended
attributes which will be processed later. Listing 13.15 shows the content of
the first 0x5C bytes of the inode. Processed values for this structure are
found in Table 13.26.
Table 13.26 Processed inode from Listing 13.15.
Offset Size Name
Value
0x00
0x08 Parent ID
0x02 (
)
0x08
0x08 Private ID
0x14 (
)
0x10
0x08 Creation Time
0x17A6D0FF85CC4DF3
2024‐01‐03 10:55:04.886308339
0x18
0x08 Modification Time 0x17A6D0FF85D308C6
2024‐01‐03 10:55:04.886749382
0x20
0x08 Change Time
0x17A6D0FF85D70E13
2024‐01‐03 10:55:04.887012883
0x28
0x08 Access Time
0x17A6D0FF85CC4DF3
2024‐01‐03 10:55:04.886308339
0x38
0x04 Num. Links
0x01 (
)
0x48
0x04 Owner
0x63 (
)
0x4C 0x04 Group
0x63 (
)
0x50
0x02 Mode
0x81A4 (rw‐r‐‐r‐‐)

The inode structure provides most of the metadata information. From Table
13.26 the file's timestamps are available along with permission information.
The owner id (UID) and group ID (GID) of the file are accessible. Note that
in this case these values are both 
 which represents the macOS
Unknown account. This is a special account that is generally used for
removable media. Hence these are common values to see for these fields in
removable media.
The inode also provides information about this file's location in the file
hierarchy. In this case the parent ID is given as 
. This means that this file
is found in the directory with inode 
 (the root directory!).
There is some expected information that is absent. In most file systems the
metadata information would provide the file size and often the filename.
Neither of these have been discovered to this point. This is due to the use of
optional extended attributes in the inode. The basic inode size is 0x5C
bytes; however, this inode's table of content entry provided a size value of
0xA0. The remaining 0x44 bytes form the extended attributes. This data is
shown in Listing 13.16.
As shown in Section 13.1.8 the extended attributes comprised three
sections. The first shows the number of extended attributes present (0x2)
and the length of the extended attribute data (0x38 bytes). The second area
contains an array of structures providing information about each of the
extended attributes present. In this case there are 
 extended attributes.
The first of these (underlined) is of type file name (0x04) with a flag value
of 0x02 and whose data component is 0x0D bytes in length. The data in this
attribute is the null‐terminated filename, Headland.jpg.
The second extended attribute is a data stream (0x08) with flags of 0x20
and is 0x28 bytes in size. The corresponding data elements are highlighted

in the same manner as the array entry. Note that data elements start on 
‐byte boundaries. The processed data stream attribute is shown in Table
13.27.
Table 13.27 Processed data stream extended attribute from Listing 13.16.
Offset Size Name
Description
Value
0x00
0x08 Size
The size in bytes of the data.
0x48294
(295,
)
0x08
0x08 Alloc.
Size
The allocated size on disk in bytes. 0x49000
(299,
)
0x10
0x08 Crypto
ID
The default encryption key used in
this data stream.
0x00 (
)
0x18
0x08 Bytes
Written
The total number of bytes that have
been written to this data stream.
0x48294
(295,
)
0x20
0x08 Bytes
Read
The total number of bytes that have
been read from this data stream.
0x00 (
)
ToC Entry 2
Listing 13.17 shows the key for ToC Entry 2. This is found at offset 0x187
relative to the end of the table of contents (
).
The length of this key is 0x08 bytes.
The key shows this to be related to inode (0x14 – 
) and be of type
0x06. Referring to Table 13.10 shows this to be a data stream item. Listing
13.18 shows the value associated with this key along with the command
used to extract it.

The value of this data stream is 
. This value is referred to as the
reference count, the record may be deleted when this value reaches zero.
ToC Entry 3
Listing 13.19 shows the key for ToC Entry 3. This is found at offset 0x18F
relative to the end of the table of contents (
).
The length of this key is 0x10 bytes.
This key again refers to inode 0x14 with a type of 0x8. This represents the
file extent. In other words the value associated with this key allows file
content to be located. The final eight bytes in this key refer to the starting
logical block to which the extent refers. In this case there is only a single
extent so the key refers to logical block 
. Listing 13.20 shows the value
corresponding to this key.
The extent value provides the allocated size of the extent in bytes
(0x49000) and the starting physical block of this extent (0x1C2). The final
step in the analysis is to recover the file content itself. Based on the extent
in Listing 13.20 this is achieved by recovery of 0x49 (
) blocks (the
block size is 0x1000 so 0x49000 bytes is the equivalent of 0x49 blocks. Of
course from the data stream in the inode it is known that the file is actually
0x48294 bytes in size). The command to recover this file is shown in
Listing 13.21 along with the recovered file in Figure 13.6.

Figure 13.6 The recovered Headland.jpg file.
Hence, the combination of the inode and the file extent keys in the file
system B‐Tree allow metadata and file content to be recovered from APFS.
13.3 APFS Advanced Analysis
So far this chapter has focused on the basic recovery of live files. In this
section some advanced topics in APFS are introduced. These include
deleted file recovery, multi‐level B‐Trees, multiple volumes and
checkpoints. Many of these have implications for file system forensics and
can be of vital importance in the processing of APFS file systems.
13.3.1 Deleted Files
The next question to ask is what occurs when a file is deleted in APFS? The
image APFS_V2.E01 was created from APFS_V1.E01 but with two files
Headland.jpg and Files/delete.txt deleted from the disk image. Previously
Headland.jpg had been recovered. Listing 13.22 shows the contents of
block 0x1C2 in APFS_V2.E01 clearly showing that the file content is still
present. Indeed the command shown in Listing 13.21 can still be executed

on APFS_V2.E01 to recover the file's content. Clearly file deletion in
APFS does not overwrite the file's content immediately.
Next recovery is attempted to determine if the file can be recovered using
file system structures as was done previously. This involves the same
method shown in the previous section. The CSB is processed and the object
map tree is located. This is then processed to determine the physical address
of the VSB the object map of which is then used to determine the physical
address of the file system tree itself. It is left as an exercise for the reader to
attempt this recovery process. Upon successful completion of this process
the file system tree is discovered at block 0x294. However, processing this
returns no reference to the deleted file. Hence it is not possible to recover
deleted files in APFS using existing structures.
13.3.2 Checkpoint Recovery
Due to the use of CoW in APFS it should be possible to find older versions
of structures in the file system. This is due to the nature of CoW in which
data to be updated is copied and changes are made to the copies. Hence it
should be possible to discover older versions of file system structures
(including the file system tree) still present in the file system.
APFS manages this process through checkpoints. The container superblock
is immediately followed by a checkpoint descriptor area and a checkpoint
data area. The starting locations and size of these are determined from the
container superblock. Figure 13.5 shows the general layout of this area.
The checkpoint descriptor area contains a series of checkpoint mapping
structures followed by the container superblock associated with that
checkpoint. The checkpoint mapping structure allows related structures to
be located in the checkpoint data area. For file system forensics the older
copies of the container superblock are often sufficient for analysis purposes.

Based on the general structure of the checkpoint descriptor area every
second block will contain a CSB structure. From the CSB this file system
contains 
 blocks in the checkpoint descriptor area. Table 13.28
summarises the transaction ID values for each of the five CSB blocks
located in APFS_V2.E01.
Table 13.28 The XID values in each of the container superblocks located in
the checkpoint descriptor area.
Block #
XID
Block # XID
 (Master) 0x0C (
)
0x09 (
)
0x0A (
)
0x0B (
)
0x0C (
)
Recall from the manual recovery of the Headland.jpg file that the
transaction ID in the CSB was 0x06. The latest version of this file system
does not contain that transaction ID in a checkpoint, so the nearest one is
chosen. The checkpoint CSB with the nearest XID (0x09) is located in
block 
 in APFS_V2.E01. Using this as the CSB for the start of analysis
allows the Headland.jpg file to be recovered from the checkpoint, even
though the content has now been deleted and it was not possible to recover
it through current structures. The complete recovery of this file is left as an
exercise for the reader.
13.3.3 Multi‐Level B‐Trees
The file system tree in APFS_V1.E01 contained three nodes over two
levels. However, during the recovery of Headland.jpg the location of the
relevant information was not shown. In this section the file system
contained in APFS_V3.E01 is used which contains 
 random‐user‐
created files.5 On this device exists a file called Headland.jpg which has
the Object ID of 0xDC (
). This section shows how this file can be
located.
Processing begins as normal with the volume located using the CSB and the
container object map. Then the file system root is located using the VSB
and the volume object map. The virtual OID for the file system root is

0x404. The volume object map contains a large number of mappings. These
are provided in Table 13.29. Checking the validity of these is left as an
exercise for the reader.
Table 13.29 Contents of the volume object map located in block 0xC00 in
APFS_V3.E01.
Virt.
Phys.
Virt.
Phys.
Virt.
Phys.
OID
Addr.
OID
Addr.
OID
Addr.
0x404 0xBE2 0x406 0x6B9 0x407 0xBFE
0x408 0xBE1 0x409 0x6BC 0x40A 0x6BD
0x40B 0xBE9 0x40C 0xBED 0x40D 0xBF1
0x40E 0xBF3 0x40F 0xBDE 0x410 0xBE5
0x411 0x6C4 0x412 0xBF7 0x413 0x6C6
0x414 0x6C7 0x415 0x6C8 0x416 0xBE3
0x417 0xBE6 0x418 0xBE7 0x419 0xBE8
0x41A 0xBEA 0x41B 0xBEB 0x41C 0xBEC
0x41D 0xBEE 0x41E 0xBEF 0x41F 0xBF0
0x420 0xBF2 0x421 0xBF4 0x422 0xBF5
0x423 0xBF6 0x424 0xBF8 0x425 0xBF9
0x426 0xBFA
The volume superblock informs the analyst that the file system root is
located at virtual OID 0x404. Consulting Table 13.29 shows the physical
location of this to be 0xBE2. Listing 13.23 shows the object and node
header for this block.
The root node of this file system tree contains 0x21 (
) keys. Before
commencing analysis it is necessary to analyse the B‐Tree information

structure located at the end of the node. Listing 13.24 shows the contents of
the B‐Tree information structure.
From the B‐Tree information structure it is clear that this tree needs more
than a single node. The total number of nodes in this tree is 0x22 (
)
with 0x643 (
) keys. In order to determine the location of a particular
key, the B‐Tree is sorted based on the OID value. The OID for the desired
file Headland.jpg is 0xDC (
). The keys are processed in the root
node to find the key that is less than or equal to the desired key. Listing
13.25 shows an excerpt from the root node's table of contents, key and
value areas. Corresponding entries are highlighted. The key value pairs are
shown in Table 13.30.

Table 13.30 Interpreted key/value pairs from Listing 13.25. Note that keys
have been left in little‐endian format for comparison reasons.
Highlighting Key
Value
Underlined
0xDB00 0000 0000 0030 0x416 (
)
Bold
0xEB00 0000 0000 0030 0x417 (
)
Comparing the keys in Table 13.30 to the target OID (0xDC) shows it to be
greater than the first key (underlined) but less than the second key (bold
font). As such the desired file will appear in the first key value pair, as this
key has the closest, but smaller, value to the target key. The desired node to
follow for this information has a virtual OID of 0x416. Referring to Table
13.29 the physical address of this virtual ID is 0xBE3. Listing 13.26 shows
an excerpt from this node showing the inode for this file. This is the fourth
ToC entry in the node. The key value is found at offset 0x20 (relative to the
end of the ToC) and is 0x08 bytes in size. The key is
0xDC00000000000030, meaning this is an inode (type: 0x03) for OID
0xDC, the desired target. The value is located at offset 0x15C and is 0xA0
bytes in size. Remember that the offset for the value is relative to the end of
the node. Also this is a leaf node, not a root node, so there is no B‐Tree
information structure present.
This section has shown how a particular record can be located in a multi‐
layer B‐Tree in APFS. It is left as an exercise for the reader to discover the
other entries in this node related to the target file.
13.3.4 Multiple Volumes
One of the unusual features about APFS is that a container can contain
multiple volumes, each of which shares free space. Locating (and
processing) multiple volumes is a relatively straightforward process.
Processing begins as normal at the CSB. Listing 13.27 shows the CSB from
APFS_V4.E01. This container contains two volumes.

The CSB shows that there can be a maximum of four volumes in this
container. The array of file system roots contains two instantiated elements.
These show the virtual OIDs for the two volumes. These values are 0x402
and 0x406, respectively. These virtual OIDs must be translated to physical
addresses using the object map structure. This is located at the physical
block 0x8B5. Processing the object map tree (Block: 0x8B6) shows that the
virtual OIDs 0x402 and 0x406 map to 0x8AB and 0x8B4, respectively.
VSB structures are found at these locations. These can be processed as
normal to recover all files in each of the volumes.
13.3.5 Extended Attributes
APFS also provides support for extended attributes which are used in a
manner similar to alternate data streams in NTFS. Recall the manual
analysis of APFS_V1.E01, only three keys from the table of contents

related to the Headland.jpg file were actually analysed (Listing 13.13),
there were two other records that were not examined. These are at key
offsets 0x139 and 0x168, respectively. Listing 13.28 shows the key and
value associated with key offset 0x139. In this case the name of this
extended attribute is com.apple.metadata:kMDItemWhereFroms, which is a
standard attribute used to show where a file was obtained from (URL,
email, etc.).
The value is composed of a two‐byte flag value (0x02) followed by a two‐
byte data length value (0x4FD). This is then followed by the actual data
itself. The possible flag values are:
0x0001: The extended attribute data is stored in a data stream;
0x0002: The extended attribute data is stored in the record itself; and
0x0004: The extended attribute record is owned by the file system.
One example of this is found in symbolic links which are covered later.
In Listing 13.28 the flag is 0x0002 meaning that the data is stored in the
record. In other words the data is found directly after the data length value.
The processing of the remaining extended attribute is left as an exercise for
the reader.
13.3.6 Links
As with most modern file systems APFS implements links (both hard and
soft) in the file system structures themselves. Listing 13.29 shows the table
of contents for the file system root node in APFS_V5.E01. All of the
highlighted entries refer to OID 0x12 (Headland.jpg).

The first highlighted entry provides the inode itself for this file. The
contents of this inode value are shown in Listing 13.30. The highlighted
value provides the number of links to this inode (0x02). The file name is
still found in the extended attributes as before.
The basic inode structure provides no information on the names of the hard
link. The next two table of content entries represent the sibling link types
(0x5). The keys and values of these are shown in Listing 13.31. The key
structure contains the standard first 
 byte OID/Type value. In each of
these cases the type value is 0x5 showing this to be a sibling link entry. The
remaining 
 bytes contains the sibling ID which is the OID for the sibling
map record. In this case these values are 0x13 and 0x14. This means that
OID's 0x13 and 0x14 contain sibling map records for this file. These will be
examined later in this section.

The values of the sibling link entries are also shown in Listing 13.31. These
contain the name of the link. The structure of these (with the interpretation
of the values in Listing 13.31) is found in Table 13.31.
Table 13.31 The structure of the sibling link record with values from
Listing 13.31.
Offset Size Name
Value 1
Value 2
0x00
0x08 Parent Folder OID 0x02 (
)
0x02 (
)
0x08
0x02 Name Length (n)
0x0D (
) 0x0D (
)
0x0A (n)
Filename
Headland.jpg hardlink.jpg
At this stage the sibling OIDs have been identified (0x13 and 0x14). These
are now sought in the table of contents in order to locate their sibling map
records. Referring to the table of contents (Listing 13.29) the relevant key
entries are found at offset 0xFC and 0x12D. These keys and corresponding
values are shown in Listing 13.32. The keys contain only the OID and the
type value (0xC0). The value is composed of a single 
‐byte OID for the
target of the link. In this case, both show the same OID 0x12.

The implementation of hard links in APFS differs slightly from that of other
file systems. The original inode (0x12 in this case) contains a reference to
the original file and the created hard link through the sibling map records.
Even the original file, Headland.jpg, gets its own sibling map record (and a
new OID number), along with the hard link as would be expected.
The file system in APFS_V5.E01 also contains a symbolic link (OID:
0x15). The symbolic link is a separate file with its own OID and inode
information. The symbolic link file also contains an extended attribute.
Listing 13.33 shows the extended attribute for OID 0x15 in APFS_V5.E01.
The name of this extended attribute is found to be com.apple.fs.symlink,
which signifies that this is a symbolic link. The value flags (0x06) show the
data is stored in the record itself and that this is a system‐owned extended
attribute. The data length is given as 0x0D and the data is found to be
Headland.jpg. Hence OID 0x15 in APFS_V5.E01 is a symbolic link to the
file Headland.jpg in the same directory as the link.

13.4 Summary
This chapter examined the APFS file system, the default file system on all
Apple devices since 2017. This is a modern file system which can be
challenging to analyse due in part to its complexity but also to its (current)
novelty.
As with many modern file systems APFS uses B‐Tree structures to store
metadata along with the use of CoW for updating said structures. While
information remains on the file system after deletion, the file system B‐Tree
is generally restructured meaning that the file content can't be located
through traditional means. However, the use of CoW (along with
checkpointing) means that older versions of the file system are sometimes
still present. From these older file system trees deleted content may be
recoverable. It should be noted that these structures are updated frequently
and there is only a limited amount of storage space for checkpoint
structures. This means that deleted file recovery may not be possible.
Support for APFS amongst commercial (and open source) tools will
improve in the coming years; however, knowledge of the inner workings of
the file system will always be important!
Exercises
1. The file system contained in APFS_V2.E01 contains a file called
Abbey.jpg (OID: 0x15). In relation to this file answer the following
questions:
a. When was the file last modified?
b. What is the file size in bytes?
c. Who is the user ID of the file's owner?
d. What is the name of the directory in which this file is contained?
e. What is the MD5 for this file?
2. A file, delete.txt (OID: 0x16), was previously deleted from
APFS_V2.E01. Can this file be recovered?

3. APFS_V3.E01 contains a file with OID 
. Locate all file system
entries for this file. In doing so answer the following questions:
a. When was the file created?
b. What is the file size in bytes?
c. What is the MD5 sum of this file?
Bibliography
APFS Overview ‐ NTFS.com [Internet] (n.d.). www.ntfs.com [cited 2024
April 3]. https://www.ntfs.com/apfs-intro.htm.
APFS Structure ‐ NTFS.com [Internet] (n.d.). www.ntfs.com [cited 2024
April 3]. https://www.ntfs.com/apfs-structure.htm.
Apple File System Reference Developer Contents [Internet] (2020). [cited
2024 April 3]. https://developer.apple.com/support/downloads/Apple-
File-System-Reference.pdf.
Cho, G.S. (2022). Design and implementation of APFS object identification
tool for digital forensics. International Journal of Internet, Broadcasting
and Communication 14 (1): 10–18.
Dewald, A. and Plum, J. (2024). APFS Internals for Forensic Analysis
[Internet]. ERNW White Paper [cited 2024 April 3].
https://static.ernw.de/whitepaper/ERNW_Whitepaper65_APFS-
forensics_signed.pdf.
Göbel, T., Türr, J., and Baier, H. (2019). Revisiting data hiding techniques
for apple file system. Proceedings of the 14th International Conference
on Availability, Reliability and Security 2019, 1–10.
Hansen, K.H. and Toolan, F. (2017). Decoding the APFS file system.
Digital Investigation 22: 107–132.
Nordvik, R. (2022). APFS. In: Mobile Forensics–The File Format
Handbook: Common File Formats and File Systems Used in Mobile
Devices 2022 (eds. Hummert, C. and Pawlaszczyk, D.), 3–39.
Cham:Springer International Publishing.

Oakley, H. (2023). APFS Hard Links, Symlinks, Aliases and Clone Files: A
Summary [Internet]. The Eclectic Light Company [cited 2024 April 3].
https://eclecticlight.co/2023/04/28/apfs-hard-links-symlinks-aliases-and-
clone-files-a-summary/.
Notes
1 And only January 2038 for 
‐bit signed Unix time.
2 The hash value is calculated over the normalised UTF‐32 name (including
the null terminator) using complemented CRC‐32. Only the lower 
bits are maintained.
3 Read‐only support is provided through the apfs‐fuse module.
4 Remember that this is a non‐root node and as such there is no B‐Tree
Information structure at the end of the node. In the event that this was
both a root and leaf node the 0x28 B‐Tree information structure must be
allowed for also.
5 There are also a number of system‐generated files present on the device.
OceanofPDF.com

Part V
The Future
OceanofPDF.com

14
Future Challenges in Digital Forensics
But what about the future? What changes will occur in the digital and file system forensic areas in the years
ahead? How will practitioners maintain their currency in the field? This chapter examines a number of
challenges that are facing the file system forensic and larger digital forensic communities in the coming years
and discusses possible means to alleviate some of these potential issues. It should be noted that many of these
challenges are not new. They have been known about for many years, but have not been suitably addressed to
date.
14.1 Challenges in Digital Forensics
For many years digital forensics was required only in a tiny minority of cases. That situation has changed. In
2018 the EU estimated that digital evidence was necessary in 85% of criminal investigations1 which has led
to one of the single largest challenges in digital forensics, that of data volume. More and more data must be
analysed in every case than ever before and more cases involve digital evidence than before.
New technologies arrive almost every day meaning that new challenges exist in terms of how to analyse these
artefacts. For instance the combined total number of apps available between Google's Play Store and Apple's
App Store is over 5.5 million.2 Each of these potentially involves new forensic challenges.
Many new technologies are utilising encryption at both hardware and software levels. Some of this software‐
level encryption is found in the file system itself. For instance from this book ext4 and APFS can provide
encryption at the file system level. NTFS can be combined with the Encrypting File System (EFS) to provide
encryption for Windows machines.
Traditionally digital forensics operated under a single standard method. Power off the device in question,
acquire an image and analyse said image. With the advent of encryption (and cloud storage technologies) the
risks associated with this strategy increased. Powering off the machine could lose some or all potential
evidence on the device. This, along with new devices such as IoT, drones and smart phones, led to the need
for new methods of operation, none of which have yet been standardised.
It has often been recognised that with all these advances in technology criminals are often early adopters of
new technologies. This means that law enforcement will see these new technologies at an early stage and need
to be conversant with their functionality and analysis. This is often hindered by the lack of knowledge and
skills in handling this new form of technology. An example of this is the use of cryptocurrencies in criminal
markets. Bitcoin, the de facto standard in cryptocurrencies was first used in 2009 and by 2011 began to
regularly record over 1000 transactions per day. According to the Drug Enforcement Agency approximately
90% of transactions in bitcoin were related to criminal activity in 2013.3 For many years law enforcement
was behind the criminals in this area. Now there are numerous courses available for law enforcement in
blockchain analysis.4
Another challenge faced by digital forensics is that of the scientific basis of the discipline. From the definition
of digital forensics (Chapter 1) it is based on scientific principles but these are sometimes lacking. Digital
forensic tools are often not validated and as such it is difficult to be confident exactly how these tools
perform. There are a number of reasons for this: the lack of maturity in the discipline, the lack of standardised
testing methods/datasets, etc. For scientific and technical evidence to be admissible in court it should conform
to the Daubert standards.5 One of the Daubert requirements is that the technique must have a known error
rate. Without testing it is impossible to determine the accuracy of the tool and therefore impossible to
determine an error rate.
Historically the challenges in digital forensics have focused on technical and sometimes legal issues. There is,
however, a third aspect of these challenges, the human being. Human factors, in particular bias, have been

recently identified as having an effect on the digital forensic process something which does not occur in more
established forensic disciplines. Improved standardisation of working practices is one means suggested to
overcome this problem.
The remainder of this chapter focuses on these challenges in digital forensics, specifically in terms of file
system forensics and proposes some possible solutions to these issues.
14.1.1 Data Volume
One of the largest problems facing digital forensics, and by extension file system forensics, is that of data
volume. This refers to the volume of data which must be analysed in every case. Consider modern society
where the majority of people have more than one digital device (computers, laptops, phones, tablets, games
consoles, etc.) capable of storing information. Additionally people have online personae (social media) that
may also be of interest. In the early days of digital forensics digital evidence was relevant only in a small
minority of cases. This has changed in recent years. Current estimates suggest that digital evidence is relevant
in 85–90% of investigations. This has increased the number of devices that must be analysed.
At the case level the volume has also increased. Consider a modern computer system. Most hard disk drives
are between 512 GiB and 1 TiB in size. The largest commercially available hard drive in 2024 could store
over 30 TiB of data. In 2002 the largest hard drive in existence was approximately 128 GiB. In 2020 Seagate
estimated the average hard drive size to be just over 2 TiB. Removable media have also increased the
problem. Removable media originally meant floppy disks! These had a storage capacity of a mere 1.44 MiB!
Now removable media mean many things, USBs, CDs, DVDs, External HDDs. Many external HDDs are in
the terabyte capacity. Hence the amount of data that can be stored on each device has increased over the
years.
The final issue in terms of data volume in digital forensic analysis is the number of devices. Traditionally a
single device might have been involved in an investigation. Consider your own home. How many digital
devices are there in that home? Remember you need to include phones, tablets, laptops, computers, external
storage devices, games consoles, smart devices, IoT devices, vehicles, etc.
The combination of digital evidence being relevant in more cases, more devices requiring analysis in each
case, and the fact that these devices are much larger than they were previously means that the volume of data
that must be processed has reached enormous proportions. This problem will only grow in the years to come.
Storage technology will improve leading to a further increase in capacity. This will be combined with
increased numbers of devices used by people and digital evidence therefore being relevant in even more cases
in the future. All these factors will combine to further exacerbate the data volume problem.
One of the reasons that the data volume problem is so prevalent is that many law enforcement agencies lack
the necessary resources to process all the devices recovered (see Section 14.1.6 for a more detailed view of
this). Even with added resources it is not guaranteed that this problem would improve. Some possible
solutions to this problem that have been suggested include the use of automation (and AI) and the use of
triage techniques.
Triage is most commonly associated with medicine (in particular emergency room medicine) in which
incoming patients are assessed and the order of treatment is decided upon based on this assessment. This can
be utilised in the digital forensic domain also. Incoming devices can be triaged and the likely relevance of the
device can be estimated from this process. This can decide the priority which can be assigned to a device. The
triage process is a quick scan which does of course risk missing something of importance but it can streamline
the digital forensic process and ensure greater efficiency.
Recently researchers have begun to examine the possibility of automation of digital forensics through the use
of artificial intelligence (AI) techniques. To the author's knowledge AI‐based systems have yet to be
successfully deployed in real‐case environments.

14.1.2 Multi‐Source Correlation
One of the reasons for the increasing data volume in digital forensics is the increasing number of potential
digital evidence sources to which people have access. This includes local sources (i.e. sources that are in their
possession) such as computers, laptops, phones and TVs. and also remote sources such as cloud storage
systems and social media profiles. Along with the increasing data volume to which this leads, it also
introduces a further complication which is the correlation of evidence across multiple sources.
Information obtained from multiple sources in a single investigation must be correlated both logically
(ensuring that it makes sense as a whole) and also temporally (ensuring that the correct timeline of actions is
generated). Generally this is a manual task for the investigator but it requires much effort on the part of the
investigator and therefore is prone to error.
Temporal correlation of computing devices provides a number of issues that were rarely present in non‐digital
evidence sources. While we now have more access to temporal information (for instance the MFT record in
NTFS stores eight timestamps about each file) and this information is more accurate than ever before (NTFS
timestamp granularity is 100 ns) the difficulties in correlating this information are vast. Hence one of the
fundamental questions that we ask in digital forensics is to try to establish the time settings on every device.
In addition to the amount of time information present the investigator must also consider the timezone
information. For instance the author works in Norway (UTC+1) and lives in Ireland (UTC+0). The author's
computers are set to the Irish timezone even when in Norway. Hence there is a potential one hour discrepancy
between the author's computer and sources of digital evidence seized in Norway.
Mitigation of this multi‐source correlation problem is challenging. Certainly, as with most of the challenges in
this chapter, training and education can help prepare the investigator for correlation of disparate sources but it
is still a manual task. Another potential solution is the use of AI and machine learning (ML) to automate the
process.
14.1.3 New File Systems
When new file systems are created they cause a major issue for file system forensics. Our standard tools no
longer support all of the common file systems. For instance when APFS was first introduced none of the
forensic tools were able to support this. The file system required reverse engineering (as little was published
officially). This process requires great skill and knowledge and is very time consuming. The process is also
subject to error.
Even in the case when a new open source file system is created in which all of the source code/documentation
is available it is still a great challenge to interpret this. The analyst must examine the system manually or
develop tools internally to process the file system. New file systems do not appear very often (or gain
popularity very quickly). In the last 15 years only ext4 and APFS have been created and gained popularity
sufficiently quickly to cause regular problems for analysts. Other modern file systems such as BtrFS and XFS
are rarely encountered during investigation and as such are less problematic for analysts.
In terms of solving this problem, again training and education will help. Knowledge of how existing file
systems function will provide insight into how new file systems will be structured. For instance every file
system that has been examined in this book contains some form of volume boot record/superblock structure.
This is a common structure found in all file systems which will contain information about the file system as a
whole. Many file systems use extent‐based storage which are all processed in a similar manner. All file
systems will store time values. Knowledge of these common features will help analysts in handling new file
systems.
Additionally file systems are increasingly complex. Consider the changes between ext3 and ext4 in which
ext4 used more than mere block pointers for data storage. Ext4 could use block pointers but could also use
extents (and extent trees), inline storage and symbolic links. These features ‘broke’ most digital forensic tools
at the time and as such required manual analysis.
Another possible means of mitigation of this issue is through information and resource sharing. From a law
enforcement perspective this might take place through organisations such as Interpol and Europol or at a

federal level inside a state. Rather than many people attempting to analyse a new file system independently
effective information sharing could simplify the task for all.
14.1.4 Encryption
More and more modern devices are encrypted by default. Breaking modern encryption schemes through brute
force is almost impossible. Certainly to have any hope of doing so requires vast computing resources, more so
than most organisations can afford. As such, encryption is viewed by many as being one of the most
challenging trends in modern computing, not just in terms of file system forensics but in terms of digital
investigation as a whole.
However, there are no easy solutions to this problem. Realistically brute force attacks are not feasible, as such
a number of stop‐gap measures have been proposed. One of the most reliable occurs at the crime scene where
traditional wisdom would say to pull the plug. This is now changing. Instead it is recommended to analyse the
running machine and acquire as much information as possible from that. Although this changes information
on the device (and as a consequence breaks the ACPO principles) it will allow for encrypted data to be
acquired in a manner in which it can be analysed. If the plug were pulled this information would be lost.
A potential legal solution to the encryption challenge is through the use of key escrow systems. In this, the
keys required to decrypt data are held by a trusted third party. In certain circumstances these keys can be
released to relevant authorised authorities (i.e. law enforcement) to allow for the decryption of data. Of course
the drawback to an escrow system is that the keys must be submitted and maintained by the users. Most likely
the criminal element would not provide the correct key to this system making it untenable.
Certain governments have requested manufacturer support in gaining access to encrypted data. This would
generally be achieved through the creation of a back‐door into the system which would bypass the encryption.
However, manufacturers and the general public are against this feature in modern computing devices and it is
assumed that it will not happen at any large scale.
14.1.5 Cloud Storage
One of the largest single changes in data storage in recent years has been the advent of the cloud. Previously
the majority of data in criminal investigation was held on physical devices owned by the suspect. This
included all documents, pictures, emails, etc. Now times are different. The majority of people use cloud
storage (although they may not be aware of the fact); however, cloud storage in itself raises some potentially
serious challenges for digital investigation.
The cloud introduces a range of problems from acquisition (how are forensically sound copies of data
acquired remotely), to management challenges (the dependence on cloud service providers to co‐operate),
leading to jurisdictional challenges (where is the data located and does the warrant cover acquisition of said
data).
Mitigation of these challenges is a complex task in itself. There are no clear solutions to these issues. Some
will certainly require global legal agreements to allow for the acquisition of data from geographically remote
cloud services and to compel corporate entities in other jurisdictions to cooperate with the investigation.
In many jurisdictions it is possible to legally acquire cloud‐based material if it is accessible from a device for
which a warrant has been obtained. This means that the use of live data forensics (LDF) techniques will allow
for (at least) logical acquisition of data. However, LDF introduces risks of its own and must be carefully
considered in each case as to whether the risk outweighs the reward.
14.1.6 Lack of Resources
File system forensic analysis is a resource‐intensive process. The task requires hardware, software and human
resources in order to succeed. This section examines the resourcing issues under these three headings and
proposes potential solutions to the issues in resourcing.

14.1.6.1 Human Resources
The human is one of the most vital components in the file system forensic analysis process. No matter how
good technology becomes there will always be a need for experienced analysts to ensure the accuracy of the
file system forensic process.
However, the human resource is not necessarily suitable to the task at hand. One of the main reasons is the
lack of knowledge that many analysts have. There are many people who can ‘push the button’ during the file
system forensic analysis process. For the vast majority of cases this is sufficient. The suspect is using standard
technologies in a standard manner and has made no serious attempts to hide potential digital evidence. Hence,
an analyst with basic training should be able to recover the potential evidence.
Now consider the case in which the suspect is actively trying to thwart the file system forensic process. The
suspect might employ encryption (Section 14.1.4), or use remote storage (Section 14.1.5) or they might
employ obscure technologies such as file systems that are unsupported by file system forensic tools (Section
14.1.3). In this cases the ‘push button’ approach is no longer suitable and further expertise is required.
From a legal perspective the increase in digital forensic knowledge and skill in the general population (and
most particularly in the IT world) increases the possibilities of cross examination of digital evidence.
Questions such as ‘how did your forensic tool recover this file?’ may not be answerable by the general file
system forensic analyst. The inability to answer the question might lead to sufficient doubt to invalidate the
results of the forensic process, at least in the eyes of the court.
Another human resource issue is found in the numbers of people working in the area. This is a general issue
in the cybersecurity field with many industries desperately short of qualified staff. This problem is only
exacerbated for law enforcement (LE) agencies as government salaries generally are not comparable to
industry salaries and as such there are more recruitment issues in LE than the private sector.
One of the main solutions to the human resource issue is to increase the training/educational opportunities for
people in this area. Educational opportunities are becoming more commonly available as many universities
now offer digital forensics/cybersecurity programs at degree and master's level. Most commercial tool
vendors and some independent training companies also offer training on particular products.
14.1.6.2 Software Resources
Another required resource for file system forensics is that of software. Generally commercial softwares are
used by most digital forensic units. One of the main driving forces for this is that these are familiar to the
court system and therefore generally accepted by the courts. However, from a resourcing perspective the issue
with these commercial solutions is cost. These products are not cheap. The products are generally licensed on
a per user basis, so the larger the unit, the larger the cost of the software. This means that it quickly becomes
infeasible to increase the size of a unit as it is not only personnel costs (i.e. salary) but also the software (and
hardware) that must also be provided for each analyst.
A possible solution to this issue is to move away from closed‐source commercial software, or at least to
augment this software with other cheaper/free alternatives. This allows for more software resources to be used
in a case and has other benefits also. For instance the use of open‐source software in conjunction with closed‐
source software will act as a form of validation of results (Section 14.1.7) from commercial tools. The open‐
source nature of the software allows for much greater disclosure in the court system, thereby strengthening
the worth of any digital evidence presented to the course.
14.1.6.3 Hardware Resources
The final aspect of the resource triad is that of hardware. Even with sufficient numbers of suitably trained
people with access to all software resources that they require, the unit still requires hardware resources. The
increase in potential sources of digital evidence (Section 14.1.1) coupled with the growth in device size in
recent years has led to more processing required in each case. This means that digital forensic units require
highly efficient hardware which has associated costs. These hardware solutions must also be scalable – as the
data volume increases so must the data analysis capabilities.

There are a number of potential solutions available to units in this area. Generally it is cheaper to get high‐end
workstations by building them on‐site. Individual components are purchased and assembled by the purchaser.
Another mitigating factor is to utilise triage approaches. Anecdotally it is clear that the majority of devices
analysed during an investigation contain little or no evidence. It is assumed that the suspect will keep
‘interesting’ activity limited to a small number of devices in their possession but every device must be
analysed. Triage is the process of evaluating the device for potential digital evidence and deciding on the
analysis path based on this evaluation. One means of performing triage is to use bootable live Linux
distributions to conduct a preliminary analysis. This uses the suspect's hardware to run (thereby removing the
need for any hardware resources for this case6) and uses open source software (no software costs) to analyse
the device. Based on the triage results the plan for further analysis can be developed.
A final solution to the hardware resource issue might be to virtualise the workstations. This generally involves
using a third‐party service provider who provides virtualised workstations. This approach is still costly
(although generally less so than purchasing the same physical computing power) but has the advantage of
scalability. Virtual hardware can be upgraded more easily than physical hardware.
14.1.7 Tool Validation/Datasets
We don't know what digital forensic tools are doing! The community of file system forensic analysts knows at
an abstract level what a file system forensic tool does but they don't understand this at the raw level.
Generally the tools that are being used are not validated by any independent body. Errors can exist in
computer software which fit one of a number of categories. These might be coding bugs (an error in
implementation of the algorithm), algorithmic bugs (an error in the algorithm itself) and unimplemented
features (as I discovered when writing this book certain forensic tools do not appear to support extent trees in
ext4!). New versions of software are created either to fix bugs or to add new functionality. However, these
new versions of software will often introduce more bugs to the system.
Tools and techniques that are relied upon in court should, at the very least, be validated. However, in the area
of digital forensics this is a non‐trivial task. This is due to a number of reasons including:
Lack of Expertise: Validation of tools is a challenge in itself and this expertise is not necessarily present
amongst digital forensic analysts.
Lack of Resources: Validation is also a complex task and as such the resources (especially time) may
not be present.
Lack of Standard Data: There are limited standardised datasets by which a tool can be evaluated.
Hence it is difficult to validate data.
Lack of Realistic Datasets: In order to validate tools datasets should be realistic. However, file system
forensic tools are often tested/validated on small disk images (such as a USB key).7
Lack of Standardised Tests: It is impossible to compare tools with a standardised test methodology
(along with standardised data sets).
There are some potential solutions to the lack of tool validation but all are complex. For instance simple
procedures such as dual tool verification could be used. In this, two independent tools are used to analyse the
same data and the results are compared. The analyst can have more confidence in results that are obtained
using two distinct tools – these are more likely to be correct. This is another use of open‐source tools as
budgetary constraints will often not permit the purchase of a second tool solely for validation purposes. Hence
the open source tool might be used for validation.
Standardised testing methods and datasets can be used. There have been some attempts at this such as the
Computer Forensic Tool Testing (CFTT) project in NIST8 but, as yet, nothing has been supported globally.
Section 14.1.9 will further elaborate on this topic as digital evidence can also be considered scientific
evidence and as such more stringent requirements also apply. These requirements will help to further define
the standardisation requirements necessary for tool validation.

14.1.8 Lack of Standardisation
As yet there are no universal standards in digital forensics. As with many areas in the digital forensic
discipline certain units/countries operate internal standards but there are no national/international standards.
Both techniques and qualifications of personnel may require standardisation in the future.
Work has begun in many organisations in terms of the lack of standardisation in digital investigation. For
instance in terms of the development of standard operating procedures the Council of Europe developed the
Electronic Evidence Guide which attempted to standardise certain procedures.
In terms of the investigator a European partnership involving Europol, The European Union Agency for Law
Enforcement Training (CEPOL), Eurojust, The European Judicial Training Network (EJTN) and The
European Cybercrime Training and Education Group (ECTEG) has recently begun the process of
standardising the requirements for all persons involved in the digital investigation process. This framework
identifies the main stakeholders in the process from law enforcement management to first responders and
attempts to formalise the knowledge/skills that each require. However, as yet there is no formal process for
evaluating the person's ability in each area of desired expertise.
14.1.9 Legal/Scientific Challenges
Related to the lack of tool validation are the legal challenges to the scientific nature of digital evidence. The
domain of digital forensics is a new domain in terms of admissibility of evidence in court proceedings. To
date this evidence has been generally accepted but this might change in the future. Even court systems which
accept digital evidence from certain standard tools might not accept evidence from any other sources. In that
case what happens with a new, unsupported file system?
Many states in the US legal system (along with Federal courts) utilise the Daubert standard9 in relation to the
admissibility of evidence. This set of five guidelines can be used by judges to decide upon admissibility.
While this standard is a legal requirement only in the United States, it is beneficial for all digital analysts to
consider the Daubert standard as the use of techniques that satisfy the Daubert criteria will greatly strengthen
the admissibility of said evidence.
The Daubert criteria are:
Testing: Has the technique been independently tested? Note that this is related to tool validation (Section
14.1.7) as testing forms a major part of the validation process. The key is that this testing should be
conducted by an independent party (although in‐house testing is better than no testing!).
Peer Review: Has the technique been published and subject to peer review? Theoretically this is simple
to achieve, the technique merely needs to be published in order to pass this criterion. Considering the
area of file system forensics there are many publications in the area that could help with this
requirement; however, there is one issue with this. LE do not always wish to publish techniques that are
being used as this might provide the criminal with insight in how to disrupt the LE process (i.e. conduct
anti‐forensics).
Known Error Rate: Does the technique have a known error rate? This knowledge is important so that
the judge can evaluate the worth of the evidence obtained through this technique. Again this is related to
testing and tool validation. This criterion is probably the most difficult to implement. It requires access to
standard datasets (and standard testing methods) neither of which exist at this moment. As such most tool
testing (and by extension error rate calculation) is performed on small single‐use datasets and are
therefore potentially suspect.
Standards: Are there standards governing the use of the technique in actual investigation? While there
are often standard operating procedures at the unit level, these do not often translate to national (or
international) level. Also as discussed in Section 14.1.8 the person is part of the execution of the
technique along with the technique itself. As such any standard must inform the court of who is
permitted to perform the technique (i.e. what skills/training are required).

General Acceptance: Is the technique generally accepted in the relevant scientific community? This is
the most abstract of all but also the one that is often easiest to show. General acceptance is often
evaluated by the courts as how often the technique is seen before the courts. Hence commercial file
system forensic tools are often accepted (as they are used many times) whereas open‐source tools may
be challenged more often!
As it currently stands LE are weak in their implementation of the Daubert criteria; however, there are means
of improving this. Many of the solutions to the challenge of lack of tool validation (Section 14.1.7) and the
lack of standardisation (Section 14.1.8) will also aid in this particular challenge. For instance the creation of
standard datasets and validation of tools will immediately address Daubert's testing criteria, and in doing so
bring law enforcement closer to calculation of the known error rate. The creation of standardised processes
and qualification frameworks directly addresses one of the criteria. Publishing knowledge about law
enforcement techniques (in peer‐reviewed publications) will address the peer‐review (and general acceptance)
criteria.
14.1.10 Presentation of Evidence
Presentation of evidence is an umbrella term that covers many forms of presentation with many different
audiences. Most people will immediately think of presentation in the court room, as the expert provides
testimony to the court. This is indeed a crucial aspect of presentation. However, there is more to this than just
presentation in the court room. It also includes report writing, both of the final report and also intermediary
reports. For instance the person who seizes a device will generally write a report about this stage in the
process, before handing the device (and the report) to the analyst for further processing. Internal team
briefings are another form of presentation. In these the analyst presents the results to date to other members of
the investigative team.
Presentation of digital evidence has a number of complexities associated with it, which provide many
challenges to the analyst. First and foremost digital evidence is highly technical in nature and this evidence
must be presented to a non‐technical audience in as clear a manner as possible. This in itself is a non‐trivial
task. It requires great understanding of the evidence in question and the methods used to obtain the evidence
and also requires excellent communication skills.
Generally the presentation of results from certain tools is relatively straightforward. For instance the courts
will generally accept the results from commercial file system forensic tools when run on traditional file
systems. However, consider the case in which the evidence is obtained from technologies that are
unsupported by current tools. This will increase the difficulty in communicating the information to a non‐
technical audience as the analyst generally needs to work at a lower level which introduces further
complexities to the task and by extension to the presentation of said evidence.
There are a number of potential mitigation strategies possible in this area. First and foremost
training/education are vitally important. The required training is both technical (as the analyst must better
understand the results that they are presenting and also how these results were obtained) and also non‐
technical such as in relation to communication skills.10 Communication skills might refer to report writing
and/or court room presentation.
Another potential means of simplifying the presentation aspects is to use a common reporting template. The
use of such a template will make it easier for the audience to interpret the results correctly. Generally there is
a standard template for most police forces; however, each template is individual. With the advent of
cybercrime (and other transnational crimes) communication occurs more frequently between police forces
and therefore a standard might be beneficial at an international level also. Numerous guides to reporting exist
(some of which are specifically geared toward digital evidence) but none are, as yet, accepted as standards.
The tool development process could be improved in such a way that the tools in the area are more reliable.
Software development is an inherently buggy area but there are techniques that can be used to improve the
quality of the final product. These can be combined with standardised operating procedures (Section 14.1.8)
and development that is driven with the Daubert tests in mind (Section 14.1.9). The combination of these

would lead to more reliable software and consequently less need to explain the intricacies of the results during
presentation of evidence.
Some argue that presentation of evidence may be less of an issue in the future as the average technical ability
of society as a whole is increasing. However, this is coupled with an increase in the complexity of digital
systems which, in the author's opinion, means that the gap in technical complexity and societal knowledge
will remain. This means that presentation of evidence will always be an area of concern for law enforcement.
14.1.11 Human Error/Bias
Within forensic science as a whole there has been an increasing realisation that both cognitive and human
factors can lead to error. This has led to the conclusion that forensic experts are subject to bias when making
certain decisions. The lack of standardised approaches and validation procedures in digital forensics when
compared with other forensic disciplines means that the analyst must make more interpretation of data that is
discovered. This provides more potential for human error and bias.
There are a number of possible mitigations that could be implemented to avoid cognitive bias. One, as with
many other challenges, is to train analysts more directly in terms of this. It is vital that the analyst is aware of
the possibility of bias so that they can more readily avoid it. Remember that while some of this would be part
of basic police education, many digital forensic analysts come from civilian backgrounds and have only
limited (if any) investigative training/experience.
The creation of standard operating procedures with the awareness of bias/error would help to alleviate the
issue in the future. Following the same, well‐tested steps where possible would help ensure that bias/error is
reduced. Ensuring that techniques are reproducible (where possible) also allows independent reviews to be
conducted. This provides greater oversight on the analyst thus reducing the risk of bias/error.
The standard operating procedure might also include peer review of cases (or a certain number of cases). This
peer review could be anything from proof‐reading of the report all the way through to complete, independent
reanalysis of all digital evidence sources. This of course is a resource‐intensive task in an area in which
resources are already an issue (Section 14.1.6).
14.2 Where Do We Go from Here?
When the challenges presented in the previous section are examined, and more importantly their possible
mitigation strategies, a number of common items are identified. These are summarised in Table 14.1.

Table 14.1 Identified current and future challenges in file system forensics and possible mitigation strategies.
Training FOSS AI Triage Legal LDF Datasets Testing Standards Info.
Sharing
Virtualisation
Data
Volume
Source
Correl.
New FS
Encryption
Cloud
Resources
Validation
Standards
Legal/Sci.
Presentation
Bias
The potential solutions in this table apply to more than one challenge in each case. The remainder of this
chapter describes each of these potential solutions in their current state in more detail.
14.2.1 Training/Education
Training and education is one of the most important aspects when addressing challenges in digital forensics. It
is directly relevant to almost all the challenges that are presented in this chapter. Before describing some of
the current options in this category it is worth describing the difference between training and education.
Training is generally accepted as the process of learning something with the aim of performing a specific skill
or behaviour. In the realm of file system forensics this might include learning how to use a particular tool
effectively. Education is the process of learning something with the goal of acquiring knowledge. Both
approaches are necessary in digital forensics.
Training will create more effective analysts in that the result of training will increase the skills that they have.
These skills are generally applicable in certain specialised cases and as such may not be sufficiently broad
when the analyst is faced with non‐standard challenges. The knowledge acquired through education will
allow the analyst to not only handle the standard cases but to take the knowledge and apply it more effectively
in other scenarios.
Training and education do not need to be only technical. There are many soft skills that are required by
analysts that are often overlooked when describing necessary training for this group. For instance as shown in
Section 14.1.10, communication (both written and verbal) skills are essential. Evidence by itself is worthless
unless it is communicated effectively to the relevant people in order to successfully conclude the
investigation.
The key question for digital forensic management is what level of training/education is required by their
analysts. Should all receive a minimum level of basic training and then some select few receive education
(with potential for academic qualifications) or do all require this education in addition to training?
14.2.2 Free Open‐Source Software (FOSS)
As discussed in Chapter 2 open‐source software is ‘software with source code that anyone can inspect,
modify and enhance’. While not always the case, open‐source software is often free of charge. This can
greatly alleviate software resource issues that exist in digital forensics today. Rather than purchasing a

commercial tool a free open‐source solution can be utilised instead. The addition of further resources for
analysis will also address the data volume challenge.
From a scientific perspective (i.e. Daubert and rules of admissibility) open‐source software should be more
favoured than commercial closed‐source tools. With closed‐source software the analyst relies upon the
software developers doing their job correctly. They rely upon the fact that the tool performs as expected.
However, with open‐source software (and the necessary knowledge of computer programming) it is possible
for the analyst to inspect the source code and determine exactly what it does. This allows for greater weight to
be associated with the open source solution.11 There are many open source file system forensic packages
available for use, from large‐scale software projects such as the Sleuthkit and Autopsy (the GUI frontend) to
smaller tools used to analyse a single file system or file system structure (e.g. analyzeMFT).12
There are a number of potential drawbacks to the use of open source software. One of the main ones is that
they are often not immediately accepted in court. Another commonly cited drawback is that they are more
difficult to use than commercial products. However, with proper validation of methods and the creation of
standard operating procedures these issues can be addressed.
14.2.3 Triage
Another potential solution in relation to data volume and also the lack of resources in law enforcement
agencies is through the use of triage techniques. Triage is a medical term which the Oxford English
Dictionary defines as ‘the assignment of degrees of urgency to wounds or illnesses to decide the order of
treatment of a large number of patients or casualties’. In the domain of file system forensics triage refers to
the prioritisation of different devices in a case in relation to the chances of finding relevant information.
One of the main benefits of triage is that it can be performed using live Linux distributions, distros that can be
used to boot the suspect machine allowing access to all information on the hard drive (assuming there is no
encryption present) without changing any of the content. All of the specialist forensic distros provide this
feature (and also provide all the tools that the analyst might require!).
Triage techniques will allow the analyst to quickly get an indication of the worth of a particular device to the
investigation, allowing the analyst to remove those devices which contain no relevant information from the
investigation. This reduces the total number of devices that need to be processed in the case, thereby
alleviating the data volume problem.
From a resource perspective, triage requires only an external storage medium (CD/DVD, USB or even a
network storage device) which can be used to boot the system using the live Linux distribution. The hardware
that is required to run this distribution is the hardware under investigation. Therefore triage techniques require
only a minimal outlay in expenses (storage media) in order to provide much processing power to the unit.
14.2.4 Artificial Intelligence (AI)
AI and ML are seen by many as being the next step forward in digital forensics, and more generally in digital
investigation. There are a number of proposed and prototype AI systems that may be applied to digital
forensics but very few, if any, have been used in court.
AI involves the study of intelligent agents, software that reacts to the environment to achieve a specific goal.
In the case of digital forensics this goal might be to locate relevant evidence that either strengthens or
weakens the investigative hypotheses. These systems can be viewed as being driven by the data (the input)
rather than explicitly by code. To provide an example of this, file system forensic tools are (currently) driven
by code. The analyst pushes a specific button in the system and a certain set of actions are executed. Now
consider fragmented files in which no metadata is available. File system forensic tools require metadata in
order to locate file content. However, there are a certain subset of tools which perform carving. These tools
can search for key indicators of files and recover the content from this. However, in the case of fragmented
files this may prove impossible due to fragmentation. AI has shown some success in carving heavily
fragmented files by using ML techniques to classify fragments of data as to their file type (e.g. Word and
Excel). These sets of various fragments can be further analysed to recreate the original file.

Another proposed use of AI is in the area of triage. Triage prioritises devices for analysis based on their
likelihood of containing evidence relevant to the case. Initial results in this area have been promising but
much more remains to be done. There are many other proposed AI solutions which have the potential to
defeat encryption, to correlate across devices, to detect relevant objects, etc.
While AI and ML have the potential to reduce the data backlog in digital forensics and to improve correlation
between devices, these techniques also suffer from certain issues. One of the most pressing issues in AI is the
lack of datasets that are available. Many AI algorithms require training in order to operate effectively.
Training is achieved through providing the algorithm with pre‐classified data and then the algorithm
determines why it was classified this way. This rule generation phase cannot occur without the training data.
As one of the biggest issues in tool validation in file system forensics is the lack of available datasets, it will
always be difficult to train AI systems in the digital forensic domain.
Another issue with the use of AI is the explanation of results. In court it is not enough to merely recover
evidence, the analyst must also show how that evidence got there and how it was recovered. Due to the nature
of AI it is often difficult to understand the reasoning employed by these algorithms and hence it is difficult to
explain to the courts how the evidence was recovered. This may prove problematic for the large‐scale
deployment of AI solutions.
14.2.5 Live Data Forensics
With the increased use of encryption and cloud‐based storage solutions, the traditional pull‐the‐plug approach
to running computers at the crime scene is no longer recommended. In the worst‐case scenario, in which the
drive is encrypted and it is impossible to recover the key, no information is recoverable from the device in
question. LDF is the ‘forensic acquisition and/or analysis of the data from a running (live) digital system for
use in a court of law’. LDF has great potential for ensuring that all evidential data is recovered from a suspect
(or victim) system. Certain information such as active network connections and volatile data (such as RAM)
is impossible to recover through post mortem forensics. In certain cases of malware investigation no
information is ever placed on disk, all is maintained in memory and as such is only accessible from the
running computer.
LDF however has many risks associated with the process. The first rule of evidence is that investigators make
no changes to any evidence that will later be relied upon in court. This is impossible to realise in LDF. Every
action taken by the investigator alters evidence on the running system. Even the simplest of actions, such as
moving the mouse on a running Windows computer, will alter information on the device. LDF practitioners
must be aware that evidence is changing and as such must ensure that the processes they use make minimal
changes to the running system and are well documented.
Certain tasks performed in the course of LDF have the potential to cause system crashes. A common task
during LDF is to acquire a copy of RAM. This action is directly accessing the memory of the computer
system which is not desirable. As such it might cause the system to crash, potentially losing all access to
remaining information.
Due to the risks LDF is often used as a form of triage. The on‐scene analyst will perform LDF on the running
computer system with the aim of discovering if it is safe to shut the computer down. This involves looking for
processes which might cause loss of information for traditional dead‐box forensics. Common tasks at this
stage are to search the suspect system for evidence of encryption or remote storage. If none of these are
discovered it is often safer to pull‐the‐plug and perform a traditional forensic examination of the system. If,
on the other hand, evidence of these processes is discovered accessible data can be gathered live from the
system. This might include copying files that are stored in encrypted or remote locations to a collection drive
for later analysis or even acquiring the computer's RAM.
Another issue with LDF is that the process is never repeatable. With traditional forensics using an acquired
disk image, the analyst can document the commands used to recover evidence from the image file. Anyone
else with access to the commands and the image file will be able to generate the exact same evidence. In LDF,
the simple act of performing LDF changes the underlying system meaning that it might be impossible to

recreate the evidence recovered. This means that documentation (the ACPO audit trail) is even more
important in LDF than in traditional digital forensics.
Overall LDF is a vital part of modern digital forensics. It can help investigators to overcome technical
limitations of dead‐box forensics by allowing access to information that would be otherwise inaccessible
through traditional approaches. It can also reduce the data volume problem if used as a form of triage.
However, the risks associated with the practice are many and as such it should be used with caution. In the
event that the investigator is uncertain how to proceed expert advice should be sought immediately!
14.2.6 Legal Solutions
File system forensics operates in the legal domain and as such a number of challenges may be addressed
through legal channels. An obvious potential use of legal initiatives to address these problems is in the area of
encryption. Generally encryption algorithms function through use of a key. As long as the key is secure access
to the data is practically impossible. In some jurisdictions key escrow is considered a solution to the
encryption challenge. In this a trusted third party stores all keys for all citizens in the state. This trusted third
party can, on receipt of an application from an authorised party (such as law enforcement/court), provide this
key to the authorised party. This system of key escrow would allow legal access to all encrypted data. Most
countries do not currently legislate for this and as such to be effective it would need some additional
legislation.
However, there are drawbacks to escrow. Encryption is often implemented through software which can be
downloaded from many sources, including international sources. This software may not enforce key escrow,
allowing criminals to bypass the system entirely. Consider the current case of firearms. In most jurisdictions
firearm ownership must be registered with the governmental authorities. However, criminals often bypass this
system and carry unregistered weapons. The same might apply in key escrow in which the criminal bypasses
the system therefore providing law enforcement with the same challenges that exist currently as no key will
be available for decryption.
The nature of modern storage and in particular the greater prevalence of cloud‐based storage solutions has led
to new challenges in file system forensics (and digital investigation in general). Often with cloud‐based
storage systems the best outcome that can be hoped for is that of logical acquisition of data. However,
depending on the scope of the warrant this may not even be legal. Depending on the jurisdiction in which an
investigation takes place the allowable actions are different. In some cases a warrant (from an authorised
party) allows investigators to acquire information that is accessible from the device in question. This means
that data stored in the cloud is accessible to the investigator. In certain jurisdictions the warrant covers only
the data stored locally. The creation of universal legislation to address this would ensure greater access to
potential evidence and also greater clarity in what tasks are permitted for law enforcement.
Improved legislation can also be used to address the lack of standards in digital investigation and, on a related
note, the admissibility of technical evidence to the courts. Evidence admissibility is often left to the presiding
judge in a particular court case to decide. However, judges are experts in law, not in digital evidence.
Legislation to codify the exact tests that need to be passed in order for digital evidence to be admitted to the
court would greatly ease the admissibility decisions. This legislation would also improve on the current
system by enforcing certain standards on tools/techniques which would greatly increase the reliability of
evidence and lead to a situation in which evidence would no longer be accepted merely because this type of
evidence had been accepted previously.
14.2.7 Data Set Development/Tool Testing
The file system forensic community is facing a myriad of challenges in the coming years. Many of these
could be aided through the development of standardised corpora for tool testing. Currently there are a number
of available datasets for this area; however, there is no agreed standard. The development of standardised
datasets would alleviate many of the challenges in the area. Firstly, and most importantly, standardised
corpora would allow for the testing of current file system forensic tools. The ability to test (and validate) the
performance of tools would greatly increase their acceptance in the courts. This would lead to increased
confidence in the investigation as a whole.

From an investigative view point these corpora would not only allow for performance to be evaluated but also
for tool performance to be compared. There are a number of potential tools available for file system forensics.
Both open‐ and closed‐source tools are available, some of which are general (i.e. support many file systems)
while others are specialised to a single (or a small number of) file system(s). While many of the community
have their favourite tools (along with anecdotal evidence as to why they are the best), the development of
standardised corpora would allow a comparison to be made. This means that the best tool could be used for a
particular task!
Running hand‐in‐hand with dataset development is the topic of tool testing. The reason these are so closely
bound is that tool testing can never be performed without access to standardised corpora. The results of tool
testing can be used to enhance the admissibility of digital evidence in the courts. Consider again the Daubert
standards for evidence admissibility. Previously it was stated that one of the most difficult facts to establish
about a tool/technique in this area is the error rate. The development of datasets will allow these rates to be
calculated (and therefore allow performance of different tools to be compared) greatly improving the
confidence in tool results.
It should be noted that the areas of dataset development and tool testing are not without their own particular
challenges. It has long been agreed that the development of realistic datasets is a difficult task. Consider the
sample data presented throughout this book. In each case the device was first zero'd (thereby removing all
older information that might interfere with the analysis of the file system) and then a new file system was
created. To this were added the exact (small) number of files to demonstrate the desired aspects of the file
system. Only those actions deemed essential for the book's contents were performed on these file systems.
Now consider a realistic scenario. A computer is seized with a 1TiB disk. This computer has been in use for
multiple years. Numerous files have been created/deleted on the device. The operating system is modifying
many files in the background. This is a more realistic case in which countless actions are performed on file
systems prior to analysis. It is difficult to build these noisy actions into any manufactured dataset. A solution
to this is to use actual devices. However, this introduces privacy concerns and also the realistic noise means
that it is impossible to say with any certainty what actions were performed and therefore what data should be
present (and recoverable) on the device.
14.2.8 Standardisation
Standard operating procedures are often found in digital investigation units for particular tasks but these
procedures are often specific to the unit. With modern investigations there is more chance of the involvement
of a number of agencies/units and the possibility of multiple countries being involved in an investigation. The
current lack of standard approaches makes it more difficult to ensure consistency and correct interpretation
from all relevant parties.
The creation of standards for multiple organisations/countries would benefit the investigative process in its
entirety. Following standardised procedures would reduce the effects of human error/bias on investigation and
also allow for transfer of human resources between units/countries during an investigation. These would
greatly improve the quality of digital investigation.
Additionally standardising the reporting of digital evidence would ease the interpretative process of all
recipients of the report. This may be achieved through standardised reporting templates and the use of the
same standard operating procedures in all cases.
14.2.9 Information Sharing
The rapid development in technology requires that vast resources are dedicated to research in the area of
digital investigation. While the academic community in this area has grown dramatically in recent years, there
is still much work done behind the scenes by technical investigators. This work is often not shared amongst
other practitioners. This leads to duplicated efforts in solving similar problems.
Consider the case in which a new file system is released. Multiple investigative agencies would work on this
independently with little knowledge of what other groups/individuals are doing. A more structured approach

to information sharing could aid in the analysis of new artefacts (be they file system or others) and might
avoid the duplication of work by multiple entities.
Information is already shared amongst many entities related to crime investigation (generally through
organisations such as Interpol and Europol). The next step in this information sharing is to share information
on the tools/techniques that are developed by individuals in the area. Few domains progress as rapidly as that
of digital evidence and as such this area would be a great exemplar to demonstrate the effectiveness of
information sharing.
14.2.10 Virtualisation
One of the challenges identified previously was the lack of resources that are available to investigators. This
includes human, software and hardware resources. One potential solution to the hardware resource issue is
that of virtualisation.
Basic virtualisation can be used to create multiple independent computers, while only needing one hardware
instance. These virtual machines can run on individual cases. Also these virtual machines can be destroyed
upon completion of a case, with a new machine created. This ensures that there is no previous information
from other cases which might cause an issue in the current case. Also, in the case of malware‐related
investigations (and indeed the analysis of any potentially infected device), the single‐use nature of these
virtual machines protects other case work from any malware‐related effects.
The ultimate in virtualisation is the realisation of forensics as a service (FAAS). With this approach forensic
analysis is conducted remotely. This allows for multiple organisations to pool resources to create a single
large‐scale digital forensic solution which is accessible by all members. FAAS is a specific example of
software as a service (SAAS), in which the software that is served is that of digital forensic software. The use
of FAAS could potentially reduce the resource challenge and with it reduce the data backlog suffered by
many digital forensic practitioners.
14.3 Summary
This chapter summarised some of the future challenges in the area of file system forensics and in more
general digital investigation. The increasing data volume has led to a more challenging environment for
digital investigation and file system forensics. The increasing number of devices requiring analysis also
highlights the lack of resources in this area. Sufficient human, software and hardware resources are beyond
the budgets of many players in this area. The data volume and resourcing challenges go hand‐in‐hand to form
a vicious cycle, in which the lack of resources adds to the data volume problem.
The data volume leads to further challenges in the area. For instance most cases involve multiple devices,
meaning there is a need for correlation across these devices in order to rebuild the entire sequence of events.
This correlation can be challenging for investigators based on a number of reasons such as time settings and
lack of expertise. The correlation task can be very time consuming further exacerbating the data
volume/backlog challenge.
New technologies have also introduced new challenges to the area. The increasing adoption of encryption at
both hardware and software levels has increased the difficulties of the digital investigation task. The increased
use of cloud‐based storage technologies has also affected the efficiency and quality of digital investigation.
Other challenges such as the lack of validated tools and the lack of standardised corpora have introduced their
own challenges as they lead to potential doubt in digital investigation results. Currently results are generally
accepted because the tools/techniques used to gather results have been previously accepted in the courts
although the scientific backing of these is still under review.
However, it is not all doom and gloom. There are a number of promising avenues that are available (and are
being actively studied) that will alleviate, if not remove, some of these challenges. The creation of
standardised corpora will lead to more potential for tool/technique validation and therefore provide more
weight to the evidence obtained from these tools. Increased training and education in the area will lead to an
increase in human resources and also an increase in the general skill level of the investigative population. This

in turn leads to more experts in the court's eyes allowing for more weight to be associated with evidence
provided. The increased training and education will also allow practitioners to go beyond the tools and to
analyse novel artefacts for which tools may not yet exist.
Techniques such as live data forensics and triage have the potential to reduce the data backlog by reducing the
number of devices that require full examination. These techniques can be used to gather all the required
evidence in certain cases and may remove other potential sources from further consideration. In either case, it
represents one less device in the backlog.
Bibliography
Al Fahdi, M., Clarke, N.L., and Furnell, S.M. (2013). Challenges to digital forensics: a survey of researchers
& practitioners attitudes and opinions. 2013 Information Security for South Africa 2013, 1–8. IEEE.
Andreassen, L.E. and Andresen, G. (2019). Live data forensics: a quantitative study of the Norwegian Police
University College students LDF examinations during their first year of practice [dissertation].
Dublin:University College Dublin.
Arshad, H., Jantan, A.B., and Abiodun, O.I. (2018). Digital forensics: review of issues in scientific validation
of digital evidence. Journal of Information Processing Systems 14 (2): 346–376.
Butler, S. (2019). Criminal use of cryptocurrencies: a great new threat or is cash still king? Journal of Cyber
Policy 4 (3): 326–345.
Carrier, B. (2005). File System Forensic Analysis. Boston, MA, London:Addison‐Wesley.
Casino, F., Dasaklis, T.K., Spathoulas, G.P. et al. (2022). Research trends, challenges, and emerging topics in
digital forensics: a review of reviews. IEEE Access 10: 25464–25493.
Cervantes Mori, M.D., Kävrestad, J., and Nohlberg, M. (2021). Success factors and challenges in digital
forensics for law enforcement in Sweden. 7th International Workshop on Socio‐Technical Perspective in IS
Development (STPIS 2021), virtual conference in Trento, Italy (11–12 October 2021), 100–116. CEUR‐
WS.
Clipper, S.M. (2017). Meets Apple vs. FBI–A comparison of the cryptography discourses from 1993 and
2016. Media and Communication 5 (1): 54.
Cybercrime Training Competency Framework –Homepage [Internet] (2024). www.ecteg.eu. [cited 2024 June
4]. https://www.ecteg.eu/tcf/co/TCF.html.
Difference between Training and Education ‐ The Peak Performance Center [Internet] (2024).
thepeakperformancecenter.com [cited 2024 April 2].
https://thepeakperformancecenter.com/business/learning/business-training/difference-between-training-
and-education/.
Du, X., Hargreaves, C., Sheppard, J. et al. (2020). SoK: Exploring the state of the art and the future potential
of artificial intelligence in digital forensic investigation. Proceedings of the 15th International Conference
on Availability, Reliability and Security 2020, 1–10.
Garfinkel, S.L. (2010). Digital forensics research: the next 10 years. Digital Investigation 7 (7): S64–S73.
Garrie, D.B. (2014). Digital forensic evidence in the courtroom: understanding content and quality.
Northwestern Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property 12: 121.
Gaskell, A. (2024). The Pressing Need To Grow The Cyber Workforce [Internet]. Forbes. [cited 2024 June 4].
https://www.forbes.com/sites/adigaskell/2022/05/19/the-pressing-need-to-grow-the-cyber-workforce/?
sh=227c7c521441.
Hansen, K.H. and Toolan, F. (2017). Decoding the APFS file system. Digital Investigation 22: 107–132.

Horsman, G. (2019). Tool testing and reliability issues in the field of digital forensics. Digital Investigation 28
(28): 163–175.
Horsman, G. and Sunde, N. (2020). Part 1: The need for peer review in digital forensics. Forensic Science
International: Digital Investigation 35: 301062.
Humphries, G., Nordvik, R., Manifavas, H. et al. (2021). Law enforcement educational challenges for mobile
forensics. Forensic Science International: Digital Investigation 38: 301129.
Irons, A. and Ophoff, J. (2016). Aspects of digital forensics in South Africa. Interdisciplinary Journal of
Information, Knowledge, and Management 11: 273–283.
Lillis, D., Becker, B., O'Sullivan, T., and Scanlon, M. (2016). Current challenges and future research areas for
digital forensic investigation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.03850.
Mitchell, F. (2010). The use of Artificial Intelligence in digital forensics: an introduction. Digital Evidence
and Electronic Signature Law Review 7: 35–41.
National Police Chief's Council (2020). Digital Forensic Science Strategy [Internet]. [cited 2024 April 3].
https://www.npcc.police.uk/SysSiteAssets/media/downloads/publications/publications-log/2020/national-
digital-forensic-science-strategy.pdf.
Page, H., Horsman, G., Sarna, A., and Foster, J. (2019). A review of quality procedures in the UK forensic
sciences: what can the field of digital forensics learn? Science & Justice 59 (1): 83–92.
Pandey, A.K., Tripathi, A.K., Kapil, G. et al. (2020). Current challenges of digital forensics in cyber security.
In Critical Concepts, Standards, and Techniques in Cyber Forensics, edited by Mohammad Shahid Husain
and Mohammad Zunnun Khan, 31–46. Hershey, PA: IGI Global, 2020. https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-
7998-1558-7.ch003.
Qadir, A.M. and Varol, A. (2020). The role of machine learning in digital forensics. 2020 8th International
Symposium on Digital Forensics and Security (ISDFS), 1–5. IEEE.
Rafique, M. and Khan, M.N. (2013). Exploring static and live digital forensics: methods, practices and tools.
International Journal of Scientific and Engineering Research 4 (10): 1048–1056.
Reedy, P. (2020). Interpol review of digital evidence 2016–2019. Forensic Science International: Synergy 1
(2): 489–520.
Roussev, V., Quates, C., and Martell, R. (2013). Real‐time digital forensics and triage. Digital Investigation
10 (2): 158–167.
Rughani, P.H. (2017). Artificial intelligence based digital forensics framework. International Journal of
Advanced Research in Computer Science 8 (8): 10–14.
Shaw, A. and Browne, A. (2013). A practical and robust approach to coping with large volumes of data
submitted for digital forensic examination. Digital Investigation 10 (2): 116–128.
Sunde, N. and Dror, I.E. (2019). Cognitive and human factors in digital forensics: problems, challenges, and
the way forward. Digital Investigation 29: 101–108.
Vincze, E.A. (2016). Challenges in digital forensics. Police Practice and Research 17 (2): 183–194.
Wu, T., Breitinger, F., and O'Shaughnessy, S. (2020). Digital forensic tools: recent advances and enhancing
the status quo. Forensic Science International. Digital Investigation 34: 300999.
Notes
1 https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/MEMO_18_3345.

2 Figure correct as of May 2022. Source https://www.statista.com/statistics/276623/number-of-apps-
available-in-leading-app-stores/.
3 The level of criminal activity associated with cryptocurrencies has fallen over the years, but the early
adopters were often criminals.
4 The blockchain is the underlying cryptographic structure that maintains the integrity and anonymity of the
Bitcoin network.
5 This is a requirement only in the US legal system. However, following the Daubert standard guidelines will
improve the quality of the evidence presented in digital forensics regardless of the jurisdiction in which the
tools are being used.
6 This is not strictly true, the live Linux distribution must be available on removable/network media for
booting. However, the costs associated with this solution are minimal compared to the cost of forensic
workstations.
7 And yes, the author is aware of the irony in this statement as all datasets used in this book were created on
small USB devices!
8 https://www.nist.gov/itl/ssd/software-quality-group/computer-forensics-tool-testing-program-cftt.
9 Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharms., Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 595 (1993).
10 Many years ago the author taught a series of ‘train the trainer’ courses for law enforcement and was
surprised at how popular it was. The majority of students did not wish to become trainers but wished to
improve presentation skills in court. One student described the court as similar to a classroom: the
audience has limited knowledge and the expert must explain complex data to this audience.
11 In reality the situation is directly opposite this. Generally closed‐source software is accepted in courts as,
through common usage, it is considered acceptable. Open‐source tools need to be accepted by the court
prior to their use. However, in the event of many analysts using open‐source tools they would, over time,
also become generally accepted in the court.
12 A list of tools (both open and closed source) is available from https://www.dftoolscatalogue.eu/.
OceanofPDF.com

Index
a
ACPO principles   5–10, 88, 441, 451
acquisition   7–9, 69, 88–92, 441
cloud   441
dc3dd   90
dcfldd   90
dd   89, 90
ewf   90, 91
guymager   91
live data forensics   450
logical   88
physical   88
admissibility   438, 444, 445, 448, 451, 452
allocation map   85
APFS   412
ExFAT   127, 128, 134
ext   201, 209
FAT   104, 105
HFS+   356
NTFS   152, 165, 166, 187
XFS   265, 283–285

APFS   393
analysis   413
B‐tree   396–399, 427–429
checkpoint   393, 410–412, 426
checkpoint area   394, 411
container   399, 400
container superblock   399–402, 414, 415
content recovery   423–425
copy on write   394, 395, 410, 411, 426
creation   412, 413
deletion   425, 426
directory record   408–410
ephemeral object   394, 395
extended attribute   407–409, 423, 430, 431
extent   410, 411
file system key   406, 421, 422
file system tree   414, 419
fragmentation   410
inode   393, 407, 408, 422, 423, 431
layout   394, 395
link   431–433
metadata recovery   420–422
object   394–396
object header   396
object map   404, 405, 414–418, 427
OBJ_ID_MASK   406

OBJ_TYPE_MASK   406
physical object   394, 395
reaper   412
sibling link entry   432
snapshot   393
space manager   394, 412
time   394
virtual object   394, 395
volume   399, 429, 430
volume superblock   399, 402–404, 414, 418–420
artificial intelligence   439, 449, 450
ASCII   40, 56, 57
decoding   56, 57
limitations   57, 59
b
bias   438, 446, 447, 453
binary   45–49
bc   52
conversion   49, 50
fixed point   54
floating point   54, 55
group names   46
negative number (see twos complement)
place‐value system   49
repeated division   51
twos complement   53

bitmap. see allocation map
block   83
B‐tree. see trees
B+‐tree. see trees

BtrFS   303
addressing   315–317, 323, 326
analysis   318–349
backup roots area   320, 340–342
B‐tree   303, 305, 342, 343
btrfs_root_backup   340–342
btrfstools   317
checksum   304
CHUNK_ARRAY   306, 319, 321–323, 339
CHUNK_ITEM   313, 314, 321–323
CHUNK_TREE   307, 319, 322–325, 339
content recovery   319, 336–338
copy on write   303, 304, 321
creation   317
CSUM_TREE   307
deletion   338
DEV_ITEM   313, 314, 325, 326
DEV_TREE   307, 320
directory   319, 329
DIR_INDEX   311, 329
DIR_ITEM   311, 329
extent   304
EXTENT_CSUM   311
EXTENT_DATA   311, 319, 336, 337
EXTENT_TREE   307
FS_TREE   307, 319, 327–334, 339

inline storage   311, 313, 336
INODE_ITEM   310, 319, 335
INODE_REF   311, 329
item   305, 310
key   305, 309
layout   304, 305
metadata recovery   319, 335
node   307–309
RAID   303, 343–346
ROOT_BACKREF   313
root directory   307
ROOT_ITEM   313, 328
ROOT_REF   313
ROOT_TREE   307, 319, 326
snapshot   304, 346–350
STRING_ITEM   315
subvolume   304, 346–350
superblock   305, 306, 318, 320, 321
time   315
c
carving   70, 96, 97
artificial intelligence   449
foremost   97
photorec   97
scalpel   97
signature   96

cloud storage   441
cluster   72, 83, 84
copy on write   85
APFS   394, 395, 410, 411, 426
BtrFS   303, 304, 321
XFS   273
d
datasets, standardised   443, 444
data volume   437–439, 443, 447–449
Daubert standard   21, 438, 444–446, 448, 452
decimal   48
bc   52
conversion   51
place‐value system   49
deletion   84
APFS   425, 426
BtrFS   338
ExFAT   140, 141
ext   225, 249–252
FAT   116, 117
HFS+   380, 381
NTFS   187–189
XFS   289, 290

digital forensics   4
definitions   4, 5
methodologies   7–10
principles, ACPO   5, 6, 441, 451
e
education. see training/education
encryption   437, 440, 441
endianness   64–66
APFS   394
big‐endian   64, 65
BtrFS   305
ext   203
ext journal   235
FAT   101
HFS+   355
interpreting   65, 66
little‐endian   64–66
mixed‐endian   81, 82
XFS   263
XFS journal   295

ExFAT   121
allocation bitmap   125, 127, 128, 134
analysis   132–142
backup VBR   122
cluster   122, 133, 134
content recovery   137–139
creation   132
data area   122
deleted files   140, 141
directory entry   125–132
directory entry, primary   126
directory entry, secondary   126
FAT chain   123, 124, 141
file   125, 129, 130, 135, 137
file allocation table   123–125, 141
filename extension   131, 135, 139, 140
fragmented files   141, 142
fsstat   122, 123, 133, 134
layout   121, 122
long file names   139, 140
metadata recovery   137, 138
root directory   133–136
stream extension   130, 131, 137, 138, 141
time   129, 130, 142, 143
timezone   130, 143
up‐case table   125, 128

volume boot record   122, 123, 133
volume GUID   125, 130
volume label   125, 128, 129
expert witness format   90
ewfacquire   90–92
ewfexport   91
ewfinfo   90
ewfmount   91–93
ewf‐tools   90
ewfverify   91
ext2. see extX
ext3. see extX
ext4. see extX
extent   84
APFS   410, 411
BtrFS   307, 311, 319, 336, 337
ext4   244–248, 251, 252
HFS+, fork   357, 379, 384
NTFS, runlist   154, 183, 184
XFS   274

extX   199
analysis   211–226
bitmap   201, 209
block group   200, 201, 204, 211, 213–216
block group descriptor table   204–206, 213–216, 255, 256
block pointer   208, 209, 219–223, 225
comparison   200
content recovery   211, 219–221
creation   210
data bitmap   201, 209
deletion   225, 226, 249–252
directory entry   201, 218, 219, 238, 239
extended attribute   252–255
extent   244–246, 251, 252
extent tree   246–248, 251, 252
flexible block group   255–258
fragmentation   222, 223
fsstat   203, 212, 214, 215, 231, 255
htree directory   230, 237–240
inline storage   248–250, 440
inode   201, 205–207, 211, 216, 217, 219, 225, 241
inode bitmap   201, 209
inode flags   208
inode location   209, 210
inode table   205–207, 222
journal   229–237

journaling level   230, 231
layout   200
links   223–225, 248, 249, 251
lost+found   219
metadata recovery   211, 220
mode   207
permissions   207, 208
reserved area   200
root directory   211, 216–219
sparse_superblock   203
superblock   200–204, 211–213
time   241–243
f

File Allocation Table (FAT)   101
access time   105–107
analysis   110–117
cluster   109
content recovery   113–115
creation   109, 110
data area   102
deletion   116, 117
directory entry   105–108
FAT chain   104, 105
file allocation table   104, 105
filename   101
fragmentation   105
FSINFO   102–104
fsstat   102, 111
layout   102
long filenames   107, 108
metadata recovery   113, 114
reserved area   102
root directory   110, 112–114
time   47, 48, 108, 109
volume boot sector   102–104, 110–112
volume label   117

fragmentation   84
APFS   410
ExFAT   141, 142
ext   221, 222
FAT   105
HFS+   383, 384
NTFS   187, 189, 190
XFS   274
h
hashing   36–38
collisions   38
crc32   38, 81, 270
md5   37, 38
pigeon hole principle   38
purpose   37, 90
sha family   37, 38

HFS+   355
allocation block   355
allocation file   356, 366, 367
analysis   369–390
attributes file   356
B‐tree   358, 360–362, 381–383
catalog file   356, 362–365, 371–377
CNID   355, 363
CNID, reserved   356
content recovery   377–380
creation   369, 370
deletion   380, 381
endianess   355
extent (see fork)
extents overflow file   356, 365–367, 384–387
file record   363, 365, 375–379, 387
file thread record   363, 366, 375, 376
folder record   363, 364, 375–377
folder thread record   363, 366, 375, 376
fork   357, 379, 384
fragmentation   383, 384
fsstat   358
journal   367–369
layout   355, 356
link, hard   388–390
link, symbolic   387, 388

metadata recovery   377
permissions   363, 364, 366
text encoding   365, 367
time   357, 358
volume header   356, 358–360, 370–373
i
imaging. see acquisition
inline storage   84
BtrFS   311, 313, 336
ext   248–250, 440
NTFS   151–154, 182
XFS   274
inode   205
APFS   393, 407, 408, 422, 423, 431
BtrFS   310, 319, 335
ExFAT, file directory entry   125, 129, 130, 135, 137
ext   205–207, 211, 216, 217, 219, 225, 241
XFS   265, 271–273, 289, 290, 292
j
journal   85
ext   229–237
HFS+   367–369
NTFS   146
XFS   292–300
k

key escrow   441, 451
l
LDF   6, 8, 450, 451
ACPO   6
acquisition   88, 441
primary storage   70
links   223
APFS   431–433
BtrFS   333
ext   223–225, 248, 249, 251
HFS+   387–390
NTFS   152, 166, 167
XFS   291, 292
linux   17
application   22
description   21, 22
distributions   27, 28
file system management   24
file system support   24, 25
GNU utilities   22, 25, 26
GUI   22, 26
history   28, 29
kernel   22–25
structure   22–27
use of   29
user accounts   30

linux commands   32
attr   290
bzip   39
cat   35
cd   33, 35
date   64
dc3dd   90
dcfldd   90
dd   89, 90
df   77
dmesg   74
egrep (see grep)
fdisk   74
file   40
gdisk   74
grep   41, 42
guymager   91, 92
gzip   39
head   35
less   35
ls   32, 33
lsblk   74
man   34
mkdir   35
mkfs   77
mkfs.btrfs   316, 317, 344

mkfs.exfat   132
mkfs.ext2   210
mkfs.hfsplus   370
mkfs.ntfs   168
mkfs.vfat   110
mkfs.xfs   275
more   35
mount   77
pipe   35, 36
pwd   32, 33
redirection   35, 36
strings   40, 41
sudo   31, 32
tail   35
tar   39
whoami   31, 32
xxd   38, 39
zip   39
live data forensics. see LDF
m
metadata   84
mounting   77
ewfmount   92, 93
mount   77
n

NTFS   145
alternate data stream   145, 190–193
analysis   167–193
$AttrDef   186, 187
attribute   151, 152, 155
$ATTRIBUTE_LIST   151, 156, 191, 192
$BITMAP   152, 165, 166, 187
$Boot   146, 148, 168–171
B‐tree (see index)
content recovery   182–184
creation   168
$DATA   152, 163, 172, 173, 182
deletion   187–189
directory   173–177
$EA   152, 167
$EA_INFORMATION   152, 167
extent (see runlist)
$FILENAME   151, 156–158, 175
fixup array   149, 150, 177, 180, 183
fragmentation   187, 189, 190
fsstat   169, 170, 185, 186
index   145–149
$INDEX_ALLOCATION   152, 165, 173–177
$INDEX_ROOT   152, 163–165, 173
layout   146
$Logfile   146

master file table (see $MFT)
metadata recovery   177, 179–182
$MFT   151–154, 168, 171–173
non‐resident   151–154, 182–184
$OBJECT_ID   152, 157–159
$REPARSE_POINT   152, 166, 167
resident   151–154, 182
runlist   154, 183, 184
$SECURITY_DESCRIPTOR   152, 159–162
$STANDARD_INFORMATION   152, 155, 156
time   150, 151
update sequence array (see fixup array)
$VOLUME_INFORMATION   152, 163, 164, 185
$VOLUME_NAME   152, 162, 185
number representation   48
fixed point numbers   54
floating point numbers   53–56
IEEE 754   55, 56
integers   49–51
negative numbers   53
ones complement   53
twos complement   53

number systems   48
binary   49
bit   45, 46
bit field   47
byte   45–48
conversion   51
conversion, bash   51–53
decimal   48, 49
hexadecimal   50, 51
repeated division   51
o
open source   17
advantages   19, 20
copyleft   19
cost   20, 448
definition   19, 448
digital forensics, in   20, 21
disclosure   21, 448
FOSS   20, 448, 449
p

partition   74
creating   74, 75
extended boot record   79
extended partition   79
fdisk   74
gdisk   74
GUID partition table   80–83
master boot record   78–80
protective MBR   80
UUID   82
r
RAID   86
s
sector   83
slack space   9, 84, 85, 88
ext directory entry   218
HFS+ index   381
MFT record   151

sleuth kit, the   92–96
blkls   96
fls   94, 95
fsstat   93
icat   95
istat   95
jcat   233, 234
jls   233, 234
mactime   95, 96
mmls   93
tsk_recover   96
snapshot   85
APFS   393
BtrFS   304, 346–350
standardisation   444, 452

storage media   69
categorisation   70
cloud   441
flash memory   73
HDD   71, 72
offline   71
optical media   72
primary   70
RAM   70
ROM   70
secondary   70
SSD   73
tertiary   70, 71
superblock. see volume boot record
t
textual representation   56
ASCII   56, 57
ISO‐8859   57–59
Unicode   59–62
UTF‐8   60, 61
UTF‐16   61, 62
time   62
date command   64
epoch based   62, 63
FAT time   47, 48, 108, 109
unix time   63

training. see training/education
training/education   8, 440, 442, 444, 446–448
trees   84
APFS   396–399, 427–429
BtrFS   303, 305, 342, 343
ext   230, 237–240
HFS+   358, 360–362, 381–383
NTFS   145–149
XFS   264, 267, 268
triage   439, 443, 449
u
unallocated space   9, 84, 88, 93, 96
v
validation   442–444, 452
virtualisation   453
volume boot record   85
APFS, container superblock   399–402, 414, 415
APFS, volume superblock   399, 402–404, 414, 418–420
BtrFS, superblock   305, 306, 318, 320, 321
ExFAT   122, 123, 133
ext, superblock   200–204, 211–213
FAT   102–104, 110–112
HFS+, volume header   356, 358–360, 370–373
NTFS   146, 148, 168–171
XFS, superblock   264, 265, 268–271, 276, 277

volume header. see volume boot record
x

XFS   263
allocation group   264, 265, 283
analysis   264
block addressing   266
b+‐tree   264, 267, 268
content recovery   276, 281, 282
copy on write   273
creation   275
deletion   289, 290
directory   273, 274, 276, 279
directory entry   265, 273, 274, 279, 280, 289
endianness   263
extended attribute   290, 291
extent   274
fragmentation   274
free block info   265, 283, 284
free list   265, 285, 286
free space b+‐tree   265, 283–285
inline storage   274
inode   265, 271–273, 289, 290, 292
inode addressing   266, 267, 278
inode B+‐tree   265, 287, 288
inode B+‐tree info   265, 286, 287
internal free list   265
journal   292–300
layout   263–265

links   291, 292
metadata recovery   276, 281, 282
root directory   276–281
signature   264, 271
superblock   264, 265, 268–271, 276, 277
time   264, 275
xfsprogs   275
OceanofPDF.com

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.
OceanofPDF.com

