landscape of the mind


human evolution and the 
archaeology of thought
landscape 
of the mind
John F. Hoffecker
c o l u m b i a  u n i v e r s i t y  p r e s s —  — n e w  y o r k

Columbia University Press
Publishers Since 1893
New York  Chichester, West Sussex
Copyright © 2011 John F. Hoffecker
All rights reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hoffecker, John F.
Landscape of the mind : human evolution and the archaeology of thought / John F. Hoffecker.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-231-14704-0 (cloth : alk. paper)
ISBN 978-0-231-51848-2 (e-book)
1. Human evolution. 2. Brain—Evolution. 3. Thought and thinking.
I. Title.
GN281.H62    2011
153.4—dc22                      2010045026
Columbia University Press books are printed on permanent and durable acid-free paper.
This book is printed on paper with recycled content.
Printed in the United States of America
c 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
References to Internet Web sites (URLs) were accurate at the time of writing. Neither the author 
nor Columbia University Press is responsible for URLs that may have expired or changed since 
the manuscript was prepared.

to the man and his work
v. Gordon Childe
(1892–1957)


Contents
preface and acknowledgments
 ix
1 Modernity and Infinity 
1
2 Daydreams of the Lower Paleolithic 33
3 Modern Humans and the Super-Brain 73
4 The Upper Paleolithic as History 104
5 Mindscapes of the Postglacial Epoch 138
6 The Vision Animal 169
notes
179
bibliography
221
index
245


preface and acknowledgments
Although readers need not concern themselves with the particu-
lars, death was very much on my mind as I wrote Landscape of the Mind. 
More to the point, the bitter gulf that lies between the death of a person as 
a biological organism and the potential immortality of his or her thoughts 
was on my mind. It reflects a conviction that “the mind” is an entity that 
transcends both biological space (that is, an individual brain) and bio-
logical time. Another conviction is that we—I refer to not only archaeolo-
gists, but also students of other disciplines—have been studying something 
important that remains only vaguely defined.
If the ultimate source of the mind is the individual brain—an unmis-
takable product of evolutionary biology—something has emerged with the 
mind, something that involves properties not found elsewhere in the bio-
logical realm. Some refer to them as emergent properties and attribute 
them to the almost unimaginable complexity of the system they represent. 
It is a system much greater than the estimated 1 million billion synap-
tic connections in an individual brain (itself described as the most com-
plex object in the known universe). At some point in human evolution, 
probably not very long ago, humans evolved the capacity for transmitting 
thoughts from one brain to others by means of externalized symbols. This 
created a “super-brain” within each social group and probably marked the 

x         preface and acknowledgments
advent of both the mind and what many of my colleagues in archaeology 
refer to as modernity.
The characteristic of the mind most important to our lives is creativity— 
the capacity for the seemingly limitless recombination of thoughts ex-
pressed as words or artifacts into hierarchically organized structures with 
no prior existence. The first bow and arrow is one example, and Catcher in 
the Rye is another. The advent of creativity changed everything. It brought 
forth onto the Earth something new, analogous to the origin of life itself. 
The creative mind has been developing and accumulating these structures 
ever since. One of the consequences is that most of us spend most of our 
time in a landscape shaped largely by structures of the mind, not by the 
processes of geomorphology or evolutionary biology.
Another conviction that readers will find expressed in this book is that 
archaeology can contribute to an understanding of the mind, including its 
origin. Although much of archaeological method may seem rather simple 
and antiquated, the data of the archaeological record is largely a trail of 
fossil thought. This is a consequence of the ability, very rare among living 
organisms (the honeybee being an example), to project mental representa-
tions outside the brain, which was something accomplished initially with 
the hands and later with the vocal tract. A central theme of this book is 
that by reaching out to touch and eventually alter their own thoughts, 
evolving humans made the mind.
As I wrote this book, I was acutely conscious of how the creativity of oth-
ers—many of them no longer living—had provided much of the structure of 
thought contained here. The thoughts of V. Gordon Childe (1892–1957) 
about archaeology and history are fundamental, as are the ideas of R. G. 
Collingwood (1889–1943), who was an influence on Childe. Some major 
ideas that readers will find in this book about the relationship between 
humans and their artifacts were articulated by André Leroi-Gourhan 
(1911–1986) several decades ago, although most English-speaking archae-
ologists are unaware of his contribution in this realm. Noam Chomsky’s 
ideas about language—especially those of the past two decades—are an 
essential foundation. Much of what I have written about the evolution 
and spread of modern humans is based on the work of Richard G. Klein. 
My parents, John Savin and Felicity Hoffecker, nurtured my interest in 
archaeology and history from an early age. My father was especially inter-
ested in Collingwood’s work and often spoke about it, along with that of 
Benedetto Croce (1856–1952), who was, in turn, an influence on Colling-

preface and acknowledgments       xi
wood. Many of the illustrations were done by Ian Torao Hoffecker. They 
are all part of this book.
A number of people read and commented on specific chapters of the 
book, and I am grateful for their time and thoughts. Colleagues and 
friends who read the critically important (and heavily revised) first chapter 
include Jolanta M. Grajski, Nancy R. Lyons, Marina Petrova, and Shelly 
Sommer. The first chapter also reflects fruitful discussions with Bob Levin 
and Valerie E. Stone.
My colleagues in archaeology at the University of Colorado in Boul-
der reviewed chapter 4 in the congenial setting of our monthly luncheon, 
and I would like to thank Cathy Cameron, Art Joyce, Steve Lekson, Paola 
Villa, and Richard Wilshusen for their thoughts and comments. Three 
anonymous reviewers for Columbia University Press plowed through the 
complete draft, and their comments and criticisms were very helpful.
I am especially grateful to the staff at Columbia University Press. Pat-
rick Fitzgerald, Publisher for the Life Sciences, embraced this project with 
enthusiasm at the outset and remained an important source of guidance 
and encouragement throughout the two and half years that I labored on 
the draft. The entire manuscript was edited by Irene Pavitt. Editorial assis-
tant Bridget Flannery-McCoy and her predecessor, Marina Petrova, also 
were very helpful.


landscape of the mind


1
Modernity and Infinity
[T]he mind is in its own nature immortal.
René Descartes
Toward the end of his memoir, Vladimir Nabokov expressed his 
frustration at “having developed an infinity of sensation and thought 
within a finite existence.”1 It was a theme he had turned to in the last lines 
of Lolita: “I am thinking of aurochs and angels, the secret of durable pig-
ments, prophetic sonnets, the refuge of art. And this is the only immortal-
ity you and I may share.”2 Nabokov died in 1977 and—like all other forms 
of organic life—relinquished his conscious sensation of being. But many 
of his thoughts continue to exist, as they do on this page, and in this way 
Nabokov transcended his finite existence.
It is a power that almost all humans possess—to transcend their exis-
tence as organic beings by communicating thoughts that will endure after 
they die. The ideas of an individual may be communicated in writing or 
print or electronic media and, before the invention of writing, by oral tra-
dition. In this way, the seemingly ephemeral thoughts that flow through 
the brain may endure for centuries or more.
Nonverbal thoughts may be communicated through art and technol-
ogy. The aurochs mentioned by Nabokov refer to cave paintings of the 
Upper Paleolithic that were created more than 30,000 years ago.3 The 
visual imaginings of the individuals who crafted these paintings are as fresh 
today as the words written by Nabokov several decades ago. The earliest  

2         modernity and infinity
known examples of thoughts expressed in material form are the bifacial 
stone tools of the Lower Paleolithic, some of which are 1.7 million years 
old.4 Much of the archaeological record, like the historical written record, 
is a record of thought.
External Thought
[O]ur world is the product of our thoughts.
James Deetz
The immortality of artifact and art is based on a unique human ability to 
express complex thoughts outside the brain. Although language comes to 
mind first as the means by which people articulate their ideas, humans 
externalize thoughts in a wide variety of media. In addition to spoken 
and written language, these media include music, painting, dance, gesture, 
architecture, sculpture, and others. One of the most consequential forms 
of external thought is technology. The earliest humans used and modified 
natural objects, as do some other animals. But during the past million 
years, humans have externalized thoughts in the form of technologies that 
have become increasingly complex and powerful with far-reaching effects 
on themselves and their environment.
Other animals can communicate their emotional states and simple bits 
of information, but only humans can project complex structures of thought, 
or mental representations, outside the brain.5 Like those of other animals, 
the human brain receives what cognitive psychologists term natural repre-
sentations. A natural representation might be the perceived or remembered 
visual image of a waterfall or the sound of the waterfall. Humans have not 
yet developed the technology to externalize a natural representation, but 
they can create and project artificial (or “semantic”) representations, such 
as a painting or verbal description of the perceived or remembered image 
of the waterfall.6 From 1.7 million years ago onward, the archaeological 
record is filled with artificial representations.
Humans have evolved two specialized organs that are used to com-
municate or externalize mental representations: the hand and the vocal 
tract (figure 1.1). The hand apparently evolved first as a means to proj-
ect thoughts outside the brain, underscoring the seminal role of bipedal-
ism in human origins. Although the primates have had a long history of 
manipulating objects with their forelimbs, it was upright walking among 
the earliest humans that freed up the hands to become the highly special-

modernity and infinity        3
ized instruments they are today.7 By roughly 3.5 million years ago, the 
australopithecine hand exhibits significant divergence from the ape hand—
especially with respect to the length of the thumb—and further changes 
coincide with an increase in brain volume and the earliest known stone 
tools, at about 2.5 million years ago. The fully modern hand apparently 
was present at 1.7 to 1.6 million years ago (that is, at the time that the first 
bifacial tools appear).8
As did the hand, the human vocal tract diverged from the ape pattern. 
Among modern human adults, the larynx is positioned lower in the neck 
than it is in apes, and the epiglottis is not in contact with the soft palate. 
Like the hand, the human vocal tract is a highly specialized instrument 
for externalizing thought. Reconstructing the evolution of the vocal tract 
is more difficult, however, than tracing the development of the hand. The 
vocal tract is composed entirely of soft parts that do not preserve in the 
fossil record, so it has been reconstructed on the basis of associated bones 
a	
	
	
	
   b
Figure 1.1  Humans evolved two specialized organs to project artificial or semantic men-
tal representations outside the brain. Under fine motor control, both the hand (A) and 
the vocal tract (B) can execute a potentially infinite array of subtle and sequentially struc-
tured movements to transform information in the brain into material objects or symboli-
cally coded sounds. (Drawn by Ian T. Hoffecker)

4         modernity and infinity
such as the hyoid. These reconstructions have been controversial, and 
it remains unclear when the human vocal tract evolved.9 Furthermore, 
the relationship between the larynx and language is problematic. In the-
ory, a syntactic language may be produced with a much smaller range of 
sounds than that offered by the human vocal tract.10 The critical ques-
tion is: When did humans begin to create “artifacts” of sound with the  
vocal tract? 
It is the archaeological record, not the human fossil record, that con-
tains the essential clues to the development of external thought. Between 
about 2.5 and 1.7 million years ago, early forms of the genus Homo (and 
perhaps the last of australopithecines) were making stone tools that, while 
comparatively simple, were beyond the capacity of the living apes.11 Not 
until about 1.7 million years ago did the first recognizable examples of 
external thought appear, in the form of bifacial tools that exhibit a men-
tal template imposed on rock (figure 1.2).12 The finished tools bear little 
resemblance to the original stone fragments from which they were chipped. 
And it is not until after 500,000 years ago (among both Homo sapiens and 
Homo neanderthalensis) that more complex representations began to appear, 
in the form of composite tools and weapons—assembled from three or four 
components—reflecting a hierarchical structure.13
After 100,000 years ago, evidence for external thought on a scale com-
mensurate with that of living humans finally emerges in the archaeo-
logical record: elaborate visual art in both two and three dimensions, 
remarkably sophisticated musical instruments, personal ornaments, 
innovative and increasingly complex technology, and other examples.14 
Although spoken language leaves no archaeological traces, its properties 
are manifest in the art and other media that are preserved. These pat-
terns in the archaeological record, which imply the presence of spoken 
language, are widely interpreted as the advent of modern behavior, often 
labeled modernity.15
Modernity has been defined as “the same cognitive and communi-
cation faculties” as those of living humans.16 This definition has been 
translated into archaeological terms in at least two ways. The first is a 
lengthy list of traits that are characteristic of living and recent humans 
but are not found in the earlier archaeological record. In addition to 
visual art and ornaments, they include the invasion of previously unoc-
cupied habitats, the production of bone tools, the development of effec-
tive hunting techniques, and the organization of domestic space.17 This 
approach has been criticized as a “shopping list” that suffers from the 

modernity and infinity         5
absence of a theoretical framework regarding the human mind. An alter-
native archaeological definition of modernity is the “storage of symbols 
outside the brain” in the form of art, ornamentation, style, and formal 
spatial patterning.18
Both definitions, however, lack a focus on the core property of language 
and modern behavior in general—the creation of a potentially infinite vari-
ety of combinations from a finite set of elements. Living humans external-
ize thought in a wider range of media than did their predecessors more 
than 100,000 years ago, but it is the ability to generate an unlimited array 
of sculptures, paintings, musical compositions, ornaments, tools, and the 
other media that really sets modern behavior apart from that of earlier 
humans and all other animals. And it is creativity—so clearly manifest in 
the archaeological record after 100,000 years ago—that provides the firmest 
basis for inferring the arrival of language.
Figure 1.2  The earliest known externalized, or phenotypic, thoughts are objects of 
stone chipped into a three-dimensional ovate shape in accordance with a mental tem-
plate. Appearing more than 1.5 million years ago, large bifaces (often termed hand 
axes) persisted with little change for 1 million years. They seem to reflect an earlier 
form of mind (or proto-mind) that lacked the unlimited creative potential of the 
modern mind. (Redrawn by Ian T. Hoffecker, from John Wymer, Lower Palaeolithic 
Archaeology in Britain as Represented by the Thames Valley [London: Baker, 1968], 51, 
fig. 14)

6         modernity and infinity
The Core Property
To conjure up an internal representation of the future, the brain 
must have an ability to take certain elements of prior experiences 
and reconfigure them in a way that in its totality does not corre-
spond to any actual past experience.
Elkhonon Goldberg
Noam Chomsky described the core property of language as discrete infinity 
(figure 1.3)19 Galileo apparently was the first to recognize and appreciate 
the significance of “the capacity to generate an infinite range of expres-
sions from a finite set of elements”20 In all languages, people use “rules” of 
syntax21 to construct sentences and longer narratives—all of which are arti-
ficial representations—out of words that have, in turn, been constructed 
from a modest assortment of sounds. There seems to be no limit to the 
variety of sentences and narratives that may be created by individuals who 
speak a syntactic language.
An essential feature of discrete infinity is hierarchical structure. A syn-
tactic language allows the speaker to create sentences with hierarchically 
Figure 1.3  The hierarchical structure of a sentence in the English language, illustrated by 
a tree representation, permits the generation of a potentially unlimited array of expres-
sions. (Redrawn from Noam Chomsky, Language and Mind, 3rd ed. [Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2006], 129)

modernity and infinity        7
organized phrases and subordinate clauses. Most words are themselves 
composed of smaller units. Without this hierarchical structure, language 
would be severely constrained. Experiments with nonhuman primates 
(for example, tamarins) have shown that while some animals can combine 
and recombine a small number of symbols only humans can generate an 
immense lexicon of words and a potentially infinite variety of complex 
sentences through phrase structure grammar.22 The same principle applies 
to the genetic code, which yields a potentially infinite variety of structures 
(phenotypes) through hierarchically organized combinations of an even 
smaller number of elements (DNA base pairs).23
As the evolutionary psychologist Michael Corballis noted several years 
ago, the core property of language may be applied to all the various media 
through which humans externalize thoughts, or mental representations. 
He described the ability to generate a potentially infinite variety of hierar-
chically organized structures as “the key to the human mind.” This prin-
ciple of creative recombination of elements is manifest, for example, in 
music, dance, sculpture, cooking recipes, personal ornamentation, archi-
tecture, and painting.24 Among most media, creativity may be expressed 
not only in digital form (that is, using discrete elements such as sounds 
and words), but also in analogical or continuous form, such as the curve of 
a Roman arch or the movements of a ballerina.
The medium of creative expression with the most profound conse-
quences for humankind is technology. The ability to generate novel kinds 
of technology—externalized mental representations in the form of instru-
ments or facilities used to manipulate the environment as an extension of 
the body—has had an enormous impact on individual lives and popula-
tion histories. Most of human technology exhibits a design—some of it 
highly complex—based on nongenetic information. Humans have rede-
signed themselves as organic beings with everything from clothing stitched 
together from cut pieces of animal hide to eyeglasses to electronic pacemak-
ers. They have also redesigned the environment, both abiotic and biotic, in 
ways that have completely altered their relationship to it as organic beings.
During the Upper Paleolithic (roughly 50,000 to 12,000 years ago), 
designed technology unfolded on a relatively modest scale with throwing 
darts, small-mammal traps, fishing nets, baking ovens, and other simple 
devices for acquiring, processing, and storing food. But widespread domes-
tication (that is, redesigning) of plants and animals in the millennia that 
followed dramatically altered the relationship between humans and their 
modified environment. Population density increased during the later 

8         modernity and infinity
phases of the Upper Paleolithic and exploded in the postglacial epoch as 
villages and cities (and new forms of society) emerged. All these develop-
ments were tied to the generation of novel technologies, including those 
that became increasingly complex. While a spoken sentence composed 
of a million words is theoretically possible, the constraints of short-term 
memory and social relationships render it impractical and undesirable. 
Such biological constraints do not always apply to technology, which may 
be hierarchically organized on an immense scale like the Internet (com-
posed of billions of elements) (figure 1.4).
By the mid-twentieth century, creativity had become a major topic in 
psychology, and numerous books and papers were written about it. Psychol-
ogists define it in much the same way as linguists define the core property 
of language: “The forming of associative elements into new combinations 
which either meet specified requirements or are in some way useful.”25 
Beyond the everyday creative use of language, they distinguish various 
forms of creativity. “Exploratory creativity” entails coming up with a new 
idea within an established domain of thought, such as sculpture, chess, 
or clothing design. Another form is “making unfamiliar combinations of 
familiar ideas,” such as the above-noted comparison between the genetic 
code and language. A rarer form is “transformational,” which Margaret 
Boden described as people “thinking something which, with respect to the 
conceptual spaces in their minds, they couldn’t have thought before.”26 An 
example would be Darwin’s theory of natural selection.
As with external thought, the archaeological record reveals when and 
where creativity emerged in the course of human evolution. Unlike exter-
nalized mental representations, however, creativity cannot be recognized in 
a single artifact or feature in that record. It is only by comparison of artifacts 
and features in space and time that creativity can be observed in archaeologi-
cal remains. The earliest externalized representations—large bifacial stone 
tools of the Lower Paleolithic—exhibit an almost total lack of design varia-
tion across time and space. But after 500,000 years ago, a limited degree of 
creativity is evident in the variations of small bifacial tools, core reduction 
sequences (that is, the succession of steps by which a piece of stone was bro-
ken down to smaller pieces to be used as blanks for tools), and, perhaps espe-
cially, the composite tools and weapons that appear by 250,000 years ago.27
The unlimited creative potential of living humans is not visible in the 
archaeological record until after the emergence of anatomically modern 
humans in Africa. And although remains of anatomically modern humans 
have been dated in Africa to roughly 200,000 years ago, it is not until some-

modernity and infinity        9
what later—after 100,000 years ago and perhaps not until after 50,000 years 
ago—that creativity on a scale commensurate with that of living humans is 
evident in the archaeological record. The most vivid illustrations are to be 
found among the examples of Upper Paleolithic visual art that date to between 
35,000 and 30,000 years ago. They include two-dimensional polychrome  
paintings and small three-dimensional sculptures that exhibit a conceivably 
Figure 1.4  Humans can create a potentially infinite variety of tools and other technology, 
structured hierarchically and much of it in analogical, rather than digital, form. Technol-
ogy is the means by which the mind engages the external world. (Illustration by Eric G. 
Engstrom, from James Deetz, Invitation to Archaeology [Garden City, N.Y.: Natural History 
Press, 1967], 91, fig. 16. Reprinted with permission from Patricia Scott Deetz)

10         modernity and infinity
unlimited recombination of elements within a complex hierarchical frame-
work with embedded components (figure 1.5). Although expressed primar-
ily in analogical rather than digital form, each work of art is like a narrative 
of words and sentences with the potential for infinite variation.28
The creativity of the modern human mind is manifest in all the media 
of external thought that are preserved in the archaeological record of this 
period. The same pattern illustrated by visual art may be inferred from 
the presence of musical instruments of the early Upper Paleolithic, but 
in this case the compositions are lost—only the paint brushes have sur-
vived.29 In the case of technology, however, the creative recombination 
of elements—and the increasingly complex hierarchical structure of tools 
Figure 1.5  The earliest known examples of visual art date to the early Upper Paleolithic, 
more than 40,000 years ago. Each work of art is unique and is hierarchically structured 
like the representations generated with syntactic language. This female figurine was 
recently recovered from Hohle Fels Cave (southwestern Germany). (From Nicholas J. 
Conard, “A Female Figurine from the Basal Aurignacian of Hohle Fels Cave in South-
western Germany,” Nature 459 [2009]: 248, fig. 1. Reprinted by permission from Macmil-
lan Publishers Ltd. Nature, copyright 2009)

modernity and infinity        11
and other means for effecting changes on the world—is readily apparent 
from 50,000 years ago onward. Novel technologies include sewn clothing, 
heated artificial shelters, watercraft, and devices for harvesting small game 
and fish and/or waterfowl. By 25,000 years ago, there is evidence for win-
ter houses, fired ceramics, refrigerated storage, and portable lamps, and 
during the late Upper Paleolithic (about 20,000 to 12,000 years ago), for 
domesticated animals (dogs) and mechanical devices.30
It is creativity in the archaeological record that signals the advent of moder-
nity, not the appearance of symbols (or the “storage of symbols” in artifacts 
and other material forms). Symbols in the strict sense are not especially com-
mon in the Upper Paleolithic record. Although the visual art is sometimes 
characterized as symbolic, these representations are actually iconic; that is, they 
have some form relationship to the objects they represent.31 Musical notes are 
rarely used as symbols. But Upper Paleolithic sites have yielded some engraved 
and painted signs that probably refer to things to which they lack any obvious 
form relationship. They include animal bones engraved with sequences of 
marks that have been interpreted as mnemonic devices (or “artificial memory 
systems”). Some of these artifacts may have been used as lunar calendars.32
The most symbolic form of external thought—syntactic language—is not 
directly represented in the archaeological record until the development of 
writing. And language is almost universally regarded as the centerpiece of 
modernity. It is the pattern of creativity in the archaeological record of ana-
tomically modern humans after 50,000 years ago that provides the strongest 
indication of language. The variable structures of Upper Paleolithic art and 
technology exhibit a complex hierarchical organization with embedded com-
ponents that resemble the subordinate clauses of phrase structure grammar.
The Phenomenon of Mind
One can hold that the mental is emergent relative to the merely 
physical without reifying the former. That is, one can maintain that 
the mind is not a thing composed of lower level things—let alone a 
thing composed of no things whatever—but a collection of functions 
and activities of certain neural systems that individual neurons pre-
sumably do not possess.
Mario Bunge
One of the most important technological breakthroughs in human his-
tory occurred in the late thirteenth century. In the years leading up to 

12         modernity and infinity
1300, someone in Europe—whose identity remains a mystery—created the 
escapement mechanism for a weight-driven clock. The escapement con-
trols the release of energy (in this case, stored in a suspended weight), 
which is essential to producing the regular beat of a clock. The perceived 
need for a timepiece more reliable than the water clock or sundial appar-
ently arose from theology and the requirements of ritual—the obligation 
to offer prayers at specific times during the day. During the fourteenth 
century, as clocks spread across western Europe, they acquired secular 
functions as well.33
Clock makers generated a number of major improvements and inno-
vations in the years that followed (for example, the spring drive around 
1500) and clock making became the supreme technical art of Europe. 
The impact of the mechanical clock extended far beyond the making and 
using of clocks, however, and the historian of technology Lewis Mum-
ford famously designated it the “key machine of the modern industrial 
age” (figure 1.6) The clock not only influenced other mechanical tech-
nologies after the thirteenth century, but became a model and metaphor 
for the universe—intimately connected to the mechanistic worldview 
Figure 1.6   The early weight-driven clocks were the digital computers of the sixteenth 
century and helped establish the mechanistic worldview of the modern age. (Redrawn 
from Donald Cardwell, The Norton History of Technology [New York: Norton, 1995], 39, 
fig. 2.1)

modernity and infinity        13
that emerged in the sixteenth through eighteenth centuries. The Euro-
peans began to think of the universe as a gigantic machine and God as a  
clock maker.34
How did humans fit into this brave new world? René Descartes (1596–
1650) thought that the human body—with its various organs circulating 
the blood, digesting food, and so forth—might indeed be regarded as “a 
machine made by the hand of God,” and he compared it directly with the 
“moving machines made by human industry.” But he made a fundamental 
distinction between the body and the mind, with its “freedom peculiar to 
itself.” Descartes could not explain the seemingly independent workings 
of the mind—so clearly manifest in the infinite possibilities of language—as 
part of a mechanical universe, and he placed it in a separate category.35 He 
was reaffirming a view of the mind compatible with both Greek philoso-
phy and Judeo-Christian theology.
Descartes’s mind–body dualism set the stage for a debate that contin-
ued through the years of the Industrial Revolution to the present day.36 
For the most part, his views have been subject to intense criticism and 
even ridicule. His contemporary Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) believed 
that the mechanistic model could be applied to the mind: “nothing but 
motions in some part of an organical body.”37 Most of Descartes’ critics 
have been appalled at the implication that supernatural forces are at work 
in the brain—the “ghost in the machine,” wrote Gilbert Ryle (1900–1976). 
Some philosophers have sidestepped this problem by recasting dualism 
in terms of properties (rather than substances); they envision the human 
mind as a material object, but one that operates according to a unique set 
of principles or properties.
In the mid-nineteenth century, Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wal-
lace proposed a “mechanism”—natural selection—to account for the struc-
ture and diversity of living organisms and to explain how they have adapted 
(often in remarkable ways) to the environments they inhabit. Perhaps the 
most revolutionary aspect of this idea is the recognition that populations of 
plant and animal species are composed of unique individuals—the variation  
on which selection acts.38 Once again, the insights offered by technology 
played a role in formulating new ideas about how the world works: Darwin 
devoted the first chapter of On the Origin of Species to the practice of plant 
and animal breeding (that is, artificial selection).39
Subsequent discoveries in genetics were necessary to explain how the 
variation among individual organisms in a population is produced. Dar-
win died without knowing the underlying genetic mechanisms of the 

14         modernity and infinity
evolutionary process. This did not preclude him, however, from devel-
oping a general explanation of how organic evolution works. The later 
discoveries in genetics were comfortably incorporated into the natural 
selection model and became part of the neo-Darwinian synthesis of the 
twentieth century.40
Evolutionary biology provided a new framework for understanding how 
humans fit into the universe, and Darwin was confident that the mind 
as well as the body could be explained as the product of the evolutionary 
process. He once characterized thought as “a secretion of the brain.” Body 
and mind alike could be understood as primarily the result of selection for 
adaptive characteristics in the context of the environments that humans 
had inhabited over the course of their evolutionary history. Although con-
sidered something of a footnote in life-science history, Wallace dissented 
from this view and endorsed a dualist perspective.41
Today, a Darwinian approach to the mind is aggressively pursued by a 
group of people who describe themselves as evolutionary psychologists. 
They reflect the marriage of cognitive psychology (which arose from the 
ashes of behaviorism in the 1950s and 1960s, in the form of the “cognitive 
revolution”) and evolutionary biology. But their “computational theory 
of the mind” may owe as much to the twentieth-century equivalent of 
the mechanical clock as it does to biology and psychology theory. The 
evolutionary psychologists view the mind as a “naturally selected neural 
computer”42 that has acquired an increasingly complex set of information-
processing functions in response to the demands of navigation, planning, 
foraging, hunting, toolmaking, communication, and sociality.43 According 
to Steven Pinker, art, music, and other creations of the mind that contrib-
ute little or nothing to individual fitness are “nonadaptive by-products” of 
the evolutionary process.44
Evolutionary biology provides an essential context for the modern 
human mind because, despite the curious properties that it eventually 
acquired (that is, the “freedom peculiar to itself”), the mind is clearly 
derived from the evolved animal brain. At the same time, an evolutionary 
context helps identify the point at which the mind departs from the brain 
and emerges as a unique phenomenon. The story has been pieced together 
from the fossil record and comparative neurobiology.
The brain evolved more than 500 million years ago among organisms 
that had become sufficiently complex and mobile that they required infor-
mation about their environment in order to stay alive and reproduce (that 
is, continue to evolve). The basic function of the brain or central nervous  

modernity and infinity        15
system is to receive, process, and respond to information concerning 
changes in the world outside the organism. From the outset, the brain has 
generated symbols because the external conditions (for example, increased 
salinity or approach of a predator) have to be converted into information; 
they can be represented but not reproduced inside the brain. These symbols 
are created in electro-chemical form by specialized nerve cells that remain 
the fundamental unit of the brain.45
The brain made complex animal life possible, and its appearance trig-
gered an evolutionary explosion of new taxa that began to lead increas-
ingly complicated lives. Over the course of several hundred million years, 
some of these taxa—especially the vertebrates—evolved large and complex 
brains that could receive and process substantial quantities of information 
from the external world. These brains also could store vast amounts of 
information (in symbolic form) about the environment, including detailed 
maps, and they could compute the solutions to simple problems, such as 
how to climb a particular tree to retrieve an elusive fruit.
From an impressive group of primates, the Old World monkeys and 
apes, humans inherited a large brain with an exceptional capacity for pro-
cessing visual information and solving problems. As already described, 
humans developed the highly unusual ability to externalize information 
in the brain—probably as an indirect consequence of bipedalism and fore-
limb specialization related to toolmaking—and this ultimately became 
the basis for the mind. As their brains expanded far beyond the already 
large brain : body ratio of the higher primates, humans evolved the unique 
capacity to recombine bits of information in the brain in a manner analo-
gous to the recombination of genes (Richard Dawkins suggested that the 
bits of information could be labeled memes).46
The human brain began to generate information, rather than merely 
process it, and to create representations of things that never were but 
might be. It began to devise not only structures that exhibit characteristics 
found in living organisms (for example, hierarchical organization), but also 
structures that are not found in living organisms (for example, geometric 
design). Moreover, humans had the means—first the hand and later the 
vocal tract—to reverse the function of the brain: instead of receiving infor-
mation about the environment, they could imagine something different 
and create it. Most humans now dwell in a bizarre landscape largely struc-
tured by the mind rather than by geomorphology.
The principles that underlie the capacity for creativity—the core property 
of language and all other media through which humans can imaginatively 

16         modernity and infinity
combine and recombine elements into novel structures—remain an elusive 
fruit. They have been characterized as emergent properties of the human 
brain yet to be understood, just as the principles of organic evolution once 
lay beyond comprehension.47 There is a consensus of sorts among philoso-
phers, psychologists, and neuroscientists (as well as artificial-intelligence 
researchers) that these properties emerged from the immense complexity 
of a brain, which has been described as “the most complicated material 
object in the known universe.” Among psychologists, this view is labeled 
connectionism. Each individual brain contains an estimated 100 billion neu-
rons and a staggering 1 million billion connections (or synapses) among 
the neurons.48
Modern humans added yet another layer of complexity to this most 
complicated object; by externalizing information in symbolic form with lan-
guage, they created a super-brain. Like a honeybee society, modern humans 
can share complex representations between two or more individual brains. 
With language (as well as visual art and other symbolic media), coded 
information can move from one brain to another in a manner analogous 
to the transmission of coded information within an individual brain. Each 
modern human social group, usually defined by a dialect or language, rep-
resents a “neocortical Internet” or integrated super-brain. And the archae-
ological record reveals that it is only with evidence for externalized sym-
bols that traces of creativity, or discrete infinity, emerged roughly 75,000  
years ago.
If the principles that underlie creativity continue to elude understand-
ing, other unique aspects of the modern human mind are readily appar-
ent. Because of the human capacity for externalizing thought, the mind 
transcends not only biological space (the individual brain), but also biologi-
cal time (the life span of the individual). And because, as the psychologist 
Merlin Donald observed, of the human capacity for externalizing thought 
in the form of “symbolic storage” (for example, notation and art), infor-
mation may be stored outside the brain altogether.49 Indeed, there is no 
practical limit to the size and complexity of the human mind because it 
exists—and has existed for 50,000 years or more—outside the evolved brain 
of the individual organism. The mind comprises an immense mass of 
information that has been accumulating and developing since the early 
Upper Paleolithic.
Until recently, the mind was dispersed across the globe in many local 
units ultimately derived from the initial dispersal of modern humans 
within and eventually out of Africa about 50,000 years ago.50 New technol-

modernity and infinity        17
ogies have begun to effect a global integration, leading back toward what 
probably was the original state of the mind—a single integrated whole.
Leviathan
Consciousness is, therefore, from the very beginning a social product.
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels
The primary focus of Thomas Hobbes’s attention was not the mind–body 
problem, but society and government. In 1651, he published his controver-
sial book Leviathan, or the Matter, Forme and Power of a Common-wealth Eccle-
siasticall and Civill (figure 1.7). Not long after his death in 1679, Oxford 
University called for burning copies of it.
Hobbes reversed Descartes’s comparison of the living body to a 
machine and asked: “[W]hy may we not say that all automata (engines that 
move themselves by springs and wheeles as doth a watch) have an artificiall 
life?”51 He promptly extended this notion to human society itself, which he 
described as “that great Leviathan . . . which is but an Artificiall Man.” He 
likened the various aspects of seventeenth-century European society to the 
functioning parts of the human body—magistrates as joints, criminal jus-
tice system as nerves, counselors as memory, and so forth—joined together 
by the ability of people to form a collective mind, “a reall unitie of them 
all, in one and the same person.”
By comparing human society to an organism, Hobbes was invoking a 
parallel with those well-known “Politicall creatures” bees and ants, which 
are today included among the eusocial, or true social, insects. At the begin-
ning of the twentieth century, the entomologist William Morton Wheeler 
proposed that an ant colony be considered a form of organism, and some 
years later he introduced the term super-organism to describe it. An ant 
colony, he noted, functions as a unit, experiences a life cycle of growth and 
reproduction, and is differentiated into reproductive and nonreproductive 
components.52 The super-organism concept may also be applied to bees, 
wasps, and termites. It fell out of favor for some years, but has been revived 
by Edward O. Wilson and others in recent decades.53
Hobbes seems to have been aware of the differences as well as the paral-
lels between human and insect society. While among ants and bees “the 
Common good differeth not from the Private,” in human society, “men 
are continually in competition for Honour and Dignity” and “there ariseth 
on that ground Envy and Hatred, and finally Warre.” Even worse, while 

Figure 1.7  Leviathan: The frontispiece of Thomas Hobbes’s famous book about society 
and government, published in 1651, depicts a monarch as being composed of all the 
individuals in his kingdom, which Hobbes described as “an Artificiall Man.” Modern 
human behavior seems to have emerged with the integration of brains through symbolic 
language, which allows representations to move from one brain to another analogous to 
the flow of information in an individual brain.

modernity and infinity        19
ants and bees follow the administration program, “amongst men, there are 
very many, that thinke themselves wiser, and abler to govern the Publique, 
better than the rest; and these strive to reforme and innovate, one this way, 
another that way; and thereby bring it into Distraction and Civill warre.”54 
In evolutionary biology terms, the differences between eusocial insect and 
human sociality reflect the contrast between a society based on a super-
organism and one based largely on a super-brain.
The key to the insect super-organism is the close genetic relationship 
among its members. The issue was addressed by Darwin, who—noting 
that the existence of nonreproductive castes among these species seems 
to contradict the natural selection model—observed that among social 
insects, “selection may be applied to the family.”55 The concept was 
eventually termed inclusive fitness and simply recognizes that cooperative 
behavior will evolve among close relatives when it increases the frequency 
of shared genes in the population—in these insects, among sibling work-
ers.56 Reproductive biology is thus another important factor among euso-
cial animals; they must be capable of producing many offspring to fill the 
ranks of their societies.57
Outside the immediate family, of course, modern human society seems 
to be based more on the sharing of ideas than of genes. As the evolu-
tionary geneticist Richard Lewontin discovered several decades ago, the 
overwhelming majority of genetic variability (85 percent) lies within rather 
than between living human populations.58 The perceived kinship of indi-
viduals within races and ethnic groups is largely illusory—these are shared 
mental representations rather than biological units. Even in hunter-gath-
erer societies, where the family and clan are the basic units of organization, 
marriage practices (that is, the incest taboo) ensure a comparatively low 
coefficient of relationship.
While honeybees evolved both a super-brain (sharing representations 
by means of the “honeybee dance”) and a super-organism, humans— 
constrained by their reproductive biology—evolved only the former. The 
result, it seems to me, is that human societies are inherently dynamic and 
unstable because the shared thoughts or information that creates the super-
brain is constantly disrupted by the competing goals (“Civill warre”) of 
their organic constituents (individuals and/or families).
The modern human super-brain nevertheless seems essential to the exis-
tence of the mind. As noted earlier, archaeological evidence suggests that 
creativity—which has been critical to the growth and development of the 

20         modernity and infinity
mind—was possible only with the confluence of individual brains effected 
by language and other forms of symbolic communication. And the inte-
grative mechanisms of the super-brain (that is, the externalization of repre-
sentations in an individual brain) are the means by which the mind exists 
beyond biological space and time, accumulating non-genetic information 
(much of it stored outside individual brains) from one generation to the 
next. Why hasn’t the concept been more central to the social sciences? It 
must be remembered that while copies of Leviathan are no longer burned, 
Hobbes’s ideas remain controversial; they seem perfectly compatible with 
modern totalitarianism. Both the religious and the political doctrines of 
the modern age that he helped introduce stress the importance of indi-
vidual choice and action.
Most people are confident, moreover, that creativity is an individual 
possession, not a collective phenomenon. Despite some notable collabora-
tions in the arts and sciences, the most impressive acts of creative thought—
from Archimedes to Jane Austen—appear to have been the products of 
individuals (and often isolated and eccentric individuals who reject com-
monly held beliefs). I think that this perception is something of an illu-
sion, however. It cannot be denied that the primary source of novelty lies 
in the recombination of information within the individual brain, appar-
ently concentrated in the prefrontal cortex of the frontal lobe.59 But I sus-
pect that as individuals, we would and could accomplish little in the way 
of creative thinking outside the context of the super-brain. The heads of 
Archimedes, Jane Austen, and all the other original thinkers who stretch 
back into the Middle Stone Age in Africa were stuffed with the thoughts 
of others from early childhood onward, including the ideas of those long 
dead or unknown. How could they have created without the collective 
constructions of mathematics, language, and art?
A few years ago, the anthropologist Robin Dunbar suggested that the 
pronounced expansion of the human brain before the emergence of 
modernity was tied to human social behavior. Observing a correlation 
between the size of the neocortex and the size of the social group among 
various primates, Dunbar concluded that the enlarged Homo brain is a 
consequence of widening social networks and that language evolved as 
a means to maintain exceptionally large networks.60 I would suggest a 
slightly different version of the “social brain hypothesis.” Modern human 
sociality is based primarily on the sharing of information—massive quanti-
ties of information—which requires considerable memory-storage capacity. 

modernity and infinity        21
I think that humans evolved oversize brains when they began to share very 
large amounts of information.
The super-brain and the collective mind might explain fundamental 
aspects of modern human cognition, including what philosophers refer 
to as intentionality—the ability to think about objects and events outside 
the immediate experience of an individual—as well as the “sense of self” 
and even consciousness. I think it is possible that all these phenomena 
are consequences of a collective mind (even if it has no collective sense 
of self or consciousness). If we conceive of the super-brain as a cogni-
tive hall of mirrors that permits each individual to reflect the thoughts 
of others, perhaps it provides the basis for mutual recognition of the 
thinking individual. Perhaps it is a biological imperative for the constit-
uents of a super-brain—who are not components of a super-organism—to 
firmly distinguish themselves as individual thinkers within a collec- 
tive mind.
In recent years, partly as a result of advances in brain-imaging tech-
nology, neuroscientists like Gerald Edelman have begun to invade areas 
once left to philosophers. Edelman draws a fundamental distinction 
between primary consciousness and higher-order consciousness, and he 
suggests that the more evolved metazoans like birds and mammals pos-
sess primary consciousness: “the ability to generate a mental scene in which 
a large amount of diverse information is integrated for the purpose of 
directing present or immediate behavior.”61 Animals with primary con-
sciousness appear to lack a sense of self or a concept of the past or the 
future. In fact, they seem to lack any ability to think in conceptual or 
abstract terms.
Only modern humans possess what Edelman refers to as higher-order 
consciousness, which entails an awareness of self, abstract thinking, and 
the power to travel mentally to other times and places. This apparently 
unique form of consciousness is possible only with “semantic or symbolic 
capabilities.” In order to think about objects and events that are removed 
from the immediate environment of an organism, symbols shared among 
multiple brains like words and sentences are necessary. Thus Edelman 
links higher-order consciousness to language. But the uniquely human 
form of consciousness is also inextricably tied to social interactions 
because language is a social phenomenon; the meanings of words and 
sentences are established by convention (and become a component of the 
collective mind).62

22         modernity and infinity
Philosophie  der  Technik
Technology is a way of revealing. If we give heed to this, then another 
whole realm for the essence of technology will open itself up to us. It 
is the realm of revealing, i.e., of truth.
Martin Heidegger
The earliest formal use of the term “philosophy of technology” is ascribed to 
a rather obscure German-Texan named Ernst Kapp (1808–1896). Kapp was 
a “left-wing Hegelian” who sought to develop a materialist version of Hege-
lian philosophy like his more famous contemporary Karl Marx. Charged 
with sedition, he fled Germany in the late 1840s and settled in central Texas. 
Kapp eventually returned to Germany and, in 1877, published Grundlinien 
einer Philosophie der Technik, which outlines a philosophy of technology—
apparently reflecting his experience in the Texas wilderness—based on the 
notion that tools and weapons are forms of “organ projection.”63
Although the influence of his ideas was limited, Kapp initiated a philo-
sophical tradition in Germany that continued into the twentieth century. 
It drew on the thinking of major figures in German philosophy, especially 
Immanuel Kant. Frederick Dessauer (1881–1963) suggested that technol-
ogy provides the means to engage what Kant had defined as “things-in-
themselves” (noumena) as opposed to mere “things-as-they-appear” (phenom-
ena). Dessauer perceived that only the craftsman and inventor encounter 
noumena, not the factory assembly-line worker and the consumer of mass-
produced technologies.64 Like Kapp, Dessauer had to flee Germany for 
political reasons—in his case, after the Nazis came to power in 1933.
Ironically, perhaps, the clearest philosophical statement on technology 
may have come from Martin Heidegger (1889–1976), who was both a neo-
Kantian and a member of the Nazi Party until 1945. Several years after 
the end of the war, Heidegger gave a series of lectures in Bremen that 
included thoughts on philosophie der technik. He was sharply critical of what 
he referred to as the “instrumental” view—that technology is merely “a 
means and a human activity” analogous to the use of natural objects by 
some animals. Instead he suggested, apparently building on both Kant and 
Dessauer, that technology is a “way of revealing” the world—of acquiring 
knowledge and learning the “truth” (Wahrheit). Technology “makes the 
demand on us to think in another way.”65
Why wasn’t technology more widely and fully addressed by philoso-
phers in western Europe or other parts of the industrialized world? Given 

modernity and infinity        23
the pivotal role of technology in transforming European society and 
thought after 1200, the avoidance of a philosophy of technology outside 
Germany seems more than odd; it borders on the pathological. During the 
twentieth century, one factor was an acute awareness of the negative effects 
of many new technologies; between 1914 and 1945, the most striking prac-
tical applications of chemistry and physics seemed to be high-tech murder.
There was a tradition with deeper roots in the Industrial Revolution, 
expressed primarily through literature and later through film, of regarding 
technology as a separate and potentially threatening entity. The theme was 
woven into Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein in the early nineteenth century and 
taken up a few years later—in response to Darwin—by the novelist Samuel 
Butler, who warned that machines were evolving faster than plants and ani-
mals and subordinating humans to their needs.66 The dangers of runaway 
technology have remained a steady theme in Western popular culture.
But technology is an essential part of the mind, and a philosophy of 
technology must be incorporated into any theory of mind. Technology 
stands in relation to the mind—an integrated and hierarchically structured 
mass of information—as the phenotype of an organism stands in relation 
to its genotype. Technology is the means by which the mind engages the 
external world, as opposed to language and art, which are the means by 
which parts of the mind communicate with each other. The distinction 
reflects the observation that the world external to the brain is not the same 
as the world external to the mind, since much of the mind already exists 
outside the brains of individual humans.
Comparative ethology suggests that a lengthy history of animal “tech-
nology” probably exists among many lineages. It includes the use and 
modification of natural features and objects by a diverse array of complex 
animals—for example, the excavation of intricate burrow systems and the 
construction of nests from many parts. Humans inherited a particularly 
impressive pattern of tool use from the highly manipulative primates. As 
Jane Goodall revealed several decades ago, this pattern includes the mak-
ing of simple tools, such as termite-fishing implements, by chimpanzees in 
the wild.67
The emergence of the human mind nevertheless transformed technol-
ogy into a very different phenomenon. With their talent for externalizing 
mental representations by their hands—first evident among some African 
hominins by 1.7 million years ago—humans acquired the ability to translate 
their thoughts into phenotypic form.68 As noted earlier, they reversed the 
function of sensory perception by converting the electro-chemical symbols 

24         modernity and infinity
in the brain into objects that had no prior existence in the landscape. At 
first, the structure of these objects was simple, but larger-brained humans 
who evolved roughly 500,000 years ago began to make more complex, hier-
archically structured implements. The creative potential of the modern 
human mind, evident in the archaeological record after 100,000 years ago, 
removed all practical limits to the complexity of technology. 
From the outset, this new form of technology was a collective enter-
prise. If each Lower Paleolithic biface was unique, like each individual 
within a population, the mental template of each biface was the same (or 
very similar) and clearly was shared among many individual brains in space 
and time. The emergence of symbolic communication in the form of syn-
tactic language created a super-brain and thus vastly increased, it seems, 
both the computational and the creative powers of human thought by 
pooling the intellectual resources of each social group.
The unprecedented size of a few middle Upper Paleolithic settlements 
indicates that the number of constituent brains within social groups in 
some places, even if assembled only temporarily, had increased significantly 
by 25,000 years ago. These groups possessed a larger and presumably more 
powerful super-brain. More permanent-looking settlements of comparable 
and even greater size appeared after the Last Glacial Maximum, and some 
of them anticipated the sedentary villages and farming communities of the 
postglacial epoch.
The number of individuals in residential farming communities, which 
experienced explosive growth in some places after 8,000 years ago, trig-
gered a radical reorganization of society and economy along rigid hierar-
chical lines. The mind of the early civilizations reflected this hierarchical 
socioeconomic structure. Two trends already evident during the preceding 
period were greatly expanded: the specialization of technological knowl-
edge and the (hierarchical) organization of collective undertakings in vari-
ous technologies (for example, irrigation systems and public buildings). 
New technologies facilitated the communication, manipulation, and stor-
age of information.
The size and organization of the civilized collective mind produced tech-
nology on a vastly greater scale of complexity, although the rigid hierarchies 
of the early civilizations seem to have constrained creativity and suppressed 
its potential for many centuries. West European societies somehow loosened 
these constraints after 1200 and began to create an industrial civilization. 
The complex technologies of late industrial and post-industrial societies 
reflect the enormous growth of specialized knowledge and the hierarchi-

modernity and infinity        25
cal organization of technology. Robert Pool described the construction of 
a complex piece of technology in the modern era: “No single person can 
comprehend the entire workings of, say, a Boeing 747. Not its pilot, not its 
maintenance chief, not any of the thousands of engineers who worked on 
its design. The aircraft contains six million individual parts assembled into 
hundreds of components and systems. . . . Understanding how and why just 
one subassembly works demands years of study.”69
The immense growth of human populations and the rise of complex 
organizations in the postglacial epoch were consequences of the steady 
accumulation of knowledge about the world—knowledge about how to 
manipulate and redesign the landscape to suit human needs and desires. 
And most of this knowledge was derived from what Heidegger referred to 
as the “revealing” power of technology. It was not accumulated by indi-
vidual humans or even by the super-brain, but was incorporated into the 
collective mind from one generation to the next.
Today most humans inhabit an environment that bears little resem-
blance to the naturally evolved landscapes their ancestors occupied a mil-
lion years ago. The processes of neither Earth history nor evolutionary 
biology yield the geometric patterns of cities, suburbs, and rural agricul-
tural landscapes that now cover much of the land surface of the planet. 
These patterns are generated in the mind and projected onto the exter-
nal world. When human societies were uniformly small and the ability to 
manipulate the world was limited, their impact was modest. But as popula-
tions grew and the body of collective external thought accumulated and 
expanded, entire landscapes were transformed—one of the most striking 
consequences of human evolution.
The roots of the mathematical patterns of thought lie deep in the evo-
lutionary past of the brain. As the metazoan brain evolved for information 
processing and directing the responses of other organs, including naviga-
tion, selection clearly favored efficiency (for example, calculating and exe-
cuting a straight-line path to or from an object or another animal). Think-
ing evolved along mathematical lines that are not characteristic of organic 
design, which may often exhibit symmetry, but not fundamental geometric 
patterns such as triangles and squares. When humans began to translate 
thought into material objects and features, they imposed new forms on the 
landscape. Many of these forms reflected the geometry of the mind.
More than a million years ago, humans apparently were externalizing 
thought only in the form of reshaped pieces of stone and (presumably) 
wood. The hand axes they produced exhibit a symmetrical oval design in 

26         modernity and infinity
three dimensions that does not necessarily reflect a geometric pattern of 
thought, and the “spheres” that date to this period seem to represent uni-
formly battered fragments of rock.70 During the later phases of the Middle 
Stone Age in Africa (after 100,000 years ago), simple geometric designs in 
two dimensions were engraved on mineral pigment, and similar designs 
appear on both engraved and painted surfaces during the early Upper 
Paleolithic in Eurasia (after 50,000 to 40,000 years ago). Occupation fea-
tures that might reflect the imposition of simple geometric patterns on the 
ground include linear arrangements of hearths and circular pits in middle 
Upper Paleolithic sites (around 25,000 years ago).
It is not, however, until the late Upper Paleolithic (after 18,000 years 
ago) that unambiguous examples of geometric design appear on the land-
scape, in the form of square and rectilinear house floors. The art of the 
period is also rich in paintings, engravings, and carvings of various geomet-
ric patterns. In the early postglacial epoch, villages comprising an amalga-
mation of rectilinear houses were constructed in the Near East, and they 
eventually were superseded by towns and urban centers with street sys-
tems and public monuments and plazas. Villages, towns, and cities were 
surrounded by agricultural landscapes composed of orthogonal irrigation 
networks and linear crop rows.71
Most of the human population now resides in a bizarre environment 
structured by the collective mind. Rock, soil, and water bodies have been 
altered, and naturally evolved ecosystems have been re-created as lawns, 
gardens, and planted fields. Many humans spend the entire day within the 
confines of rectilinear walls, stairways, doors, and sidewalks. Moreover, 
humans born into this landscape of thought internalize it as they mature, 
and the process is reversed: the external structure is incorporated into the 
synaptic pathways of the developing mind.
A Fossil Record of Thought
The archaeological record is constituted of the fossilized results of 
human behavior, and it is the archaeologist’s business to reconstitute 
that behavior as far as he can and so to recapture the thoughts that 
behavior expressed. In so far as he can do that, he becomes a historian.
V. Gordon Childe
In the early twenty-first century, there is no field of research more exciting 
than neuroscience. This is largely a consequence of brain-imaging tech-

modernity and infinity        27
nologies developed in the 1970s and later, which provide measures of neu-
ral activity. The new technologies include computed tomography (CT), 
positron-emission tomography (PET), and functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (f MRI). For the first time, researchers can observe brain function— 
including proxy measures of thought itself—in a manner analogous to the 
examination of physiological functions like blood circulation and diges-
tion. The increasingly broad application of the new techniques has pro-
duced many revelations and surprises,72 and some neuroscientists have 
begun to address questions once left to philosophers of the mind.
If current developments in neuroscience offer unprecedented insights 
into the brain and the mind, the field of archaeology would seem to be 
one of the least promising avenues. Archaeology began as a hobby for 
collectors of antiquities and emerged during the nineteenth century as 
a discipline devoted to the documentation of material progress. Human 
prehistory was initially subdivided into three successive ages: Stone, 
Bronze, and Iron. The emphasis on progress reflected a European per-
spective on history and humanity that dominated but did not survive 
the nineteenth century.73
V. Gordon Childe is often quoted for his observation that the material 
objects of the archaeological record must be treated “always and exclu-
sively as concrete expressions and embodiments of human thoughts and 
ideas.”74 Archaeologists have tended to treat them, however, more along 
the lines of what Martin Heidegger labeled “instruments.”75 The artifacts 
and features of the archaeological record typically have been viewed as a 
means to an end—survival and progressive improvement—somewhat analo-
gous to the computational theory of mind. The instrumental approach 
was on the march in the years following World War II, as many archaeolo-
gists adopted a systems ecology perspective.76
In the final decades of the twentieth century, a reaction arose against 
this approach (often condemned with the ultimate epithet “functional-
ism”), and the views of Childe were recalled.77 In the early 1980s, the 
British archaeologist Colin Renfrew urged his colleagues to develop an 
archaeology of mind, or cognitive archaeology.78 In 1991, the psychologist 
Merlin Donald published a book about the origin of the mind in which 
he observed that modern humans are storing thoughts outside the brain.79 
This idea made its way into paleoanthropology and stimulated further 
reflection and debate among archaeologists. Renfrew and other cognitive 
archaeologists began to think about the way the mind engages the material 
world through the body.80

28         modernity and infinity
How does the cognitive archaeologist go about collecting and analyzing 
“human thoughts and ideas” from the archaeological record? If written 
records or accessible oral traditions are present, they provide an interpre-
tive context for the archaeological materials. In most prehistoric settings, 
written and oral sources are absent, but other types of symbols are—at least 
after 75,000 years ago. If they are iconic (for example, a female figurine), 
their referents are knowable, if not their possible wider meaning (perhaps 
fertility). But if they are abstract symbols with an arbitrary relationship to 
their referents, their encoded meanings may be unknowable. And before 
75,000 years ago, symbols seem to be absent altogether from the archaeo-
logical record.
Instead of trying to recover content and meaning, the cognitive archae-
ologist can focus his or her attention on the structure of externalized 
thoughts. This opens a wider and deeper field of inquiry because humans 
have been externalizing their thoughts in nonsymbolic form for more than 
1.5 million years, creating a fossil record of thought that is unique in the 
history of life. How are these representations organized? What is the struc-
tural relationship among the elements—digital and/or analogical—from 
which they are composed? How many hierarchical levels and embedded 
components can be identified? How much creative recombination of ele-
ments is manifest among different artifacts? Moreover, the symbolic repre-
sentations that emerge after 75,000 years ago exhibit their own structure.81
In fact, the formal analysis of structure had its origin in the study of lan-
guage (that is, symbolic representation). It was initially developed by Swiss-
born linguist Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913), who taught in Paris dur-
ing the early years of the twentieth century. Structuralisme was applied in 
other fields by various French scholars, including the ethnologist Claude 
Lévi-Strauss (1908–2009), who analyzed the structure of kinship, myth, 
song, and other aspects of “primitive” culture.82 André Leroi-Gourhan 
(1911–1986) developed a structuralist approach to Paleolithic archaeol-
ogy; not surprisingly, perhaps, he saw parallels between language and tool-
making. Although he became famous for his study of cave art, his most 
significant contribution was the chaîne opératoire, or the sequence of steps 
involved in making an artifact.83 Structuralism later faded in popularity, 
but the sequential analysis of artifact production became a core element of 
archaeology. It is an important source of information about the increasingly 
hierarchical structure of artificial representation in human evolution.84
Much of this book is devoted to the modern mind, which emerged before 
50,000 years ago in sub-Saharan Africa and spread across the Earth with 

modernity and infinity        29
anatomically modern humans (Homo sapiens). The advent of the mod-
ern mind is discernible only through the fossil record of thought (the 
modern human cranium had earlier acquired its volume and shape). As 
already noted, the archaeological record reveals the potentially infinite 
capacity for creative recombination of elements in various media among 
Homo sapiens after 50,000 years ago and at a level of structural complexity 
commensurate with that of living people. And this evidence coincides 
with archaeological traces of symbolism—the sharing of complex men-
tal representations through icons and digital symbols in the form of art 
and, by implication, spoken language—which was a prerequisite for the 
super-brain and collective mind. In fact, there are now indications of the 
collective mind at least 75,000 years ago in the form of abstract designs 
incised into mineral pigment. But broader spectra of space and time are 
still required to document creativity on a modern scale (that is, the later 
Middle Stone Age of Africa and the early Upper Paleolithic of Eurasia 
and Australia).
With the emergence and dispersal of the modern mind, the process of 
accumulating knowledge in the form of information shared among individ-
ual brains and stored in many forms of external thought began in earnest. 
Much of this knowledge was acquired through the process of technologi-
cal engagement with the external world (or with “things-in-themselves,” as 
Kant would say). The information was stored, communicated, and manip-
ulated in many different forms (language, visual art, music, tools, and so 
on), and at least some of these media were preservable materials. Most of 
the subsequent growth and development of the modern mind occurred 
in the absence of written records. Nevertheless, the accumulating mass of 
information and knowledge is partially observable in the fossil record of 
thought—the archaeological record.
As human populations in some places experienced explosive growth 
after the Upper Paleolithic—a consequence of their accumulated knowl-
edge, as well as favorable climate conditions—the mind became immense. 
Not only were hundreds of thousands of individual brains contributing to 
the collective mind in places like Mesopotamia and northern China, but 
the storage of information had reached vast proportions. These societies 
reorganized themselves, often with violence or threats of violence, along 
rigid hierarchical political and economic lines. The collective mind also was 
reorganized into a more hierarchically structured entity with specialized 
compartments of thought (for example, metallurgy and architecture). Writ-
ing was one of several means by which the sprawling mind of civilization  

30         modernity and infinity
was integrated and organized, and it eventually broadened the record of 
thought in profound ways.
This book also is about the origin of the mind, or what the archaeologist 
Steven Mithen described as the “prehistory of the mind.”85 The fossil record 
of thought provides critical data here as well, although in necessary con-
junction with the other fossil record: the skeletal remains of earlier humans. 
This is because developments in human evolutionary biology—including 
changes in the brain, hand, and vocal tract—over several million years are 
implicated in the origin of the mind. The fossil record of thought offers a 
glimpse of the externalized mental representations of early humans, which 
not only are less structurally complex than our own, but also exhibit little 
creative variation; most of the latter appears to be random and aimless. I 
suspect that these early specimens of external thought played a role in the 
origin of mind and that they are more than a fossil record of early thought 
or products of what might be referred to as the proto-mind.
The emergence of the mind probably is connected to external thought; 
the projection of mental representations outside the brain by means of the 
hand and, later, the vocal tract is related to the expansion of the brain and 
the development of its unique properties of creativity and consciousness. 
As a result of bipedalism, the early human brain began to engage directly 
with the material world not simply by moving the body, but also by exter-
nalizing mental representations—imposing their nongenetic structure on 
the environment with the hand—and thus establishing a feedback relation-
ship between the brain and the external thoughts, as well as among the 
multiple brains within each human social group. Making an artifact is a 
way of talking to oneself. As the brain expanded and the synaptic connec-
tions grew exponentially, the externalized thoughts became increasingly 
complex and hierarchical, as well as more creative.
Once humans began to shape natural materials in accordance with 
mental templates (around 1.7 to 1.5 million years ago), they began to pop-
ulate their environment with physical objects that reflected the structure 
of mental representations (specifically, artificial representations). Seman-
tic thoughts acquired a presence outside the brain, and they were visible 
not only to the individuals who made the artifacts but also to others; they 
became perceptual representations of unprecedented form (that is, the 
brain receiving representations of its own creation). The artifacts were talk-
ing back. These circumstances created a reciprocal relationship between 
internal and external thought, as well as a dynamic interaction among 
individuals projecting and receiving artificial representations.

modernity and infinity        31
As the thoughts externalized by humans became increasingly complex 
(beginning after 500,000 to 300,000 years ago), the synaptic pathways of 
the brain, where information is stored, contained a growing percentage 
of received representations generated by other human brains. Before the 
emergence of language, representations would have been communicated 
among individuals and across generations in the form of artifacts. With 
their hands, humans could manipulate and recombine the elements of 
these external representations. And at some point (perhaps not until after 
500,000 years ago), external representations in the form of more efficient 
implements were almost certainly having a measurable impact on human 
ecology and individual fitness—another reinforcing feedback loop (that is, 
natural selection).
The critical transformation from the proto-mind to the mind probably 
began roughly 300,000 years ago, when brain volume had attained its mod-
ern level and the vocal tract was either evolving or had already evolved its 
modern human form. Changes in the shape and size of the brain probably 
were important, including relative expansion of the prefrontal cortex and 
temporal lobes. The archaeological evidence, which includes composite 
tools and weapons, as well as a variety of small biface forms, indicates the 
ability to externalize representations in a more complex and hierarchical 
form with greater variation in design (that is, more creative).86
Among unanswered questions about human evolution, the origin of lan-
guage is still at the top of the list. In some respects, it is more of a mystery 
than consciousness itself. But if the immediate causal factors that lie behind 
the emergence of spoken language remain obscure (perhaps a genetic muta-
tion), the ultimate source most probably is the increasingly creative manipu-
lation of materials with the hands—the ability to recombine the elements of 
artifacts on multiple hierarchical levels. The same cognitive faculties appar-
ently underlie language and toolmaking. And at some point (perhaps about 
100,000 years ago or earlier in Africa), the vocal tract acquired a specialized 
motor function analogous to that of the hands.
Archaeologists have long speculated about the parallels and possible 
evolutionary relationship between creating artifacts and constructing sen-
tences.87 The subject received a good deal of attention during the 1960s 
and 1970s, beginning with Leroi-Gourhan. In 1969, Ralph Holloway—a 
specialist on the evolution of the human brain—wrote a classic paper on 
the underlying similarities between language and toolmaking.88 Others 
who articulated this view included the American archaeologist James Deetz 
and the South African paleoanthropologist Glynn Isaac.89 In the decades 

32         modernity and infinity
that followed, the parallels were pursued with less vigor, owing perhaps 
to the rise of the “modular model” of the mind, which implies separate 
neural structures for each language and toolmaking.90 But in a major paper 
published in 1991, the psychologist Patricia Greenfield restated the case 
for a “common neural substrate” for language and “object combination.”91
Brain-imaging research during the past two decades has eroded support 
for the modular model and yielded new information on possible neural 
connections between language and tools. In general, brain-imaging studies 
have revealed a high degree of interconnectivity among the various regions 
of the brain.92 Some recent PET data indicate activation of many of the 
same areas for spoken and gestural language, supporting earlier views of 
neural connections between vocal tract and hand function.93
The turning point—the emergence of the modern mind—was the com-
bined appearance of syntactic language, unlimited creativity, and the 
super-brain. The fossil record of thought seems to indicate that these devel-
opments were more or less coincident, and they are logically interrelated, 
if not inseparable. Syntactic language created the super-brain; earlier forms 
of shared thought would seem to have been too limited. At the same time, 
the creative manipulation of information that language represents was a 
social phenomenon that could exist only among multiple brains in bio-
logical space and time. And the exponential growth in neuronal network 
complexity engendered by the integration of brains, already oversize, in a 
human social group may have been the requisite basis for unlimited cre-
ativity expressed in language and other media.
The seeming suddenness of these developments has inspired the sug-
gestion among some paleoanthropologists that a genetic mutation may 
have provided the trigger. Possible mutations have been hypothesized in 
the areas of speech and working memory.94 Moreover, there have been 
attempts to research this problem with genetic data from both living 
and fossil humans.95 It turns out that there is yet another fossil record—
composed of DNA rather than mineralized bones or thought—that holds 
potential for understanding the origin of the mind.

2 
daydreams of the lower paleolithic 
I dream things that never were and say why not?
George Bernard Shaw
The earliest known examples of external thought appear roughly 
1.5 million years ago in the form of chipped stone objects. They are pieces 
of rock chipped on both sides into an oval shape that archaeologists refer 
to as bifaces, or bifacially flaked tools. They have achieved the exalted 
status of an externalized mental representation because they bear little 
resemblance to the natural object—a variously shaped cobble or fragment 
of rock—from which they were made. They have been transformed by a 
pair of human hands in accordance with a mental template, or an internal 
mental representation.1
Archaeologists have been unable to determine whether the bifaces 
were meant to “stand for something” or were an arbitrary form imposed 
on pieces of rock. They may have represented a large leaf of exaggerated 
thickness or a giant coarse seed.2 And it is possible that the biface makers 
imposed representations on other natural forms—carving pieces of wood 
or drawing patterns in sand, for example—that have not been preserved 
(some rare examples of bifaces chipped in bone have turned up).3 In any 
case, humans continued to make bifaces for more than a million years 
before they began to create more complex representations outside their 
heads. Many of the later bifaces exhibit a more refined appearance, but 
their essential form remains unchanged.

34         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
The appearance of the bifaces was a major event in the prehistory of 
the mind, signifying the emergence of what I have termed the proto-mind. 
From that moment forward, humans began to match at least some of the 
thoughts generated in their heads with those constructed outside the brain. 
Mental representations were no longer entirely confined to the brain. 
Equally important, it seems, was the fact that mental representations— 
not simply emotional states or simple bits of information—could be com-
municated from one individual brain to another. Humans now found 
themselves in a landscape populated not only by physical features and 
organic beings, but also by thoughts in an incredibly literal sense.
The Evolutionary Biology of the Mind
[M]an bears in his bodily structure clear traces of descent from some 
lower form; but it may be urged that, as man differs so greatly in his 
mental power from all other animals, there must be some error in 
this conclusion.
Charles Darwin
One of the more intriguing implications of the archaeological record 
is that the mind or something very much like it could have emerged in 
another form of life. There is nothing magical about humans; it is simply 
that the evolutionary biology of humankind created certain conditions 
from which the emergence of the mind was possible and perhaps even 
inevitable. What conditions would be necessary to produce a true mind, 
a mass of structured information that exists both inside and outside an 
integrated group of organically evolved individual brains that continually 
feed it with newly generated structures of information?
An organism must possess a large brain capable of constructing com-
plex representations from incoming sensory data. Many vertebrates meet 
this criterion, and some of them have brains that exceed the volume of 
the human brain either in absolute terms or in relation to their overall 
body size.4 And while a brain might construct internal representations of 
the outside world from a sense of smell or sound, representations based 
on electromagnetic radiation within the spectrum of visible light would 
seem to offer the greatest potential for complex and intricate maps of the 
external world.5 Vision provides a potentially immense range—for all prac-
tical purposes unlimited, when humans look at distant stars and galaxies. 
Finally, there must be a means to project mental structures outside the 

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        35
brain in order to establish a feedback relationship between internal and 
external representations. In humans, the hands and later the vocal tract 
became the means, but any number of features might have evolved an 
analogous function in other organisms, such as a tail or antennae.
Humans evolved within the primates, and both comparative anatomy 
and the fossil record indicate that the aforementioned conditions have 
deep roots in this mammalian order. As early as 50 to 40 million years 
ago, the primates exhibited three important trends that provided a basis 
for the subsequent evolution of monkeys, apes, and humans: (1) increased 
size of the brain relative to the body, (2) increased emphasis on vision 
and corresponding reduction in sense of smell, and (3) increased use of 
extremities for manipulation.6 All were essential for the emergence of the 
human mind.
The basic function of a brain is to enable an organism to respond 
to spatial and/or temporal changes in its environment.7 A brain allows 
the organism to detect a drop in temperature, a potential food item, the 
approach of a predator, and other changes important to its survival and 
reproduction, and to generate an appropriate response. Among all but 
the most primitive metazoans (that is, sponges), the function of the brain 
is performed by specialized cells called neurons; among most multicellular 
animals, neurons are organized into a central nervous system. But even 
the simplest protozoa that appeared more than 3 billion years ago—the 
prokaryotes, or unicellular organisms that lack a nucleus—contain struc-
tures that evolved to perform the same basic function. The notorious and 
well-studied bacterium E. coli has protein molecules embedded in its cell 
wall that act as receptors to detect specific chemicals outside itself. These 
receptors trigger responses that vary according to whether the chemical 
detected is a food or a toxin. Propelled by six flagella, E. coli can maintain 
or change direction in response to the information received and transmit-
ted by its receptors.8
When the human mind is placed into this universal functional perspec-
tive on the nervous system and brain, its unique capabilities become less 
curious. Although the ability of the mind to create alternative realities 
seems rather exotic in the context of metazoan brain evolution, it still 
serves the same basic purpose. Modern humans not only sense changes 
in the environment, but imagine and predict future changes. This feat is 
achieved by generating novel and often complex representations of the 
environment, either inside or outside the brain and often collectively 
among individuals. Cognitive psychologists often refer to it as “mental 

36         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
time travel.”9 In fact, the effort to predict animal movements, rains and 
floods, solar and lunar eclipses, and other natural events has been a major 
theme in human history.
Neurons and the nervous system evolved more than 500 million years 
ago among the ancient phylum Cnidaria, which includes jellyfish, hydra, 
sea anemones, and corals.10 The design of nerve cells has not changed fun-
damentally since the appearance of the Cnidarians, only the ways in which 
they are organized. Neurons are true cells (eukaryotes) with a nucleus, but 
they also possess a long string-like structure called an axon and fine branch-
ing structures called dendrites (figure 2.1). Because they are dynamically 
polarized, neurons can transmit electrical signals to each other across syn-
apses, the point at which they connect. They can transmit signals in digital 
(on or off) or analogical (continuous scale) mode. Networked together by 
synaptic connections, neurons can store, as well as transmit, information 
about the environment.
Just as there is continuity between the “brain” functions of the simplest 
organisms and the often wild imaginings of the human mind, responding 
to changes in the external world, there is continuity between the transmis-
sion and storage of information in the neurons of the early metazoans 
and human language. As the linguist Derek Bickerton observed, both are 
representational systems.11 Even the simple nervous systems of the Cnidar-
ians contain information about the environment outside the organisms. 
As new metazoan groups evolved, they developed more complex neuronal 
networks to process and store more detailed information—more detailed 
and accurate maps—of the external world. They also evolved new organs 
that expanded the amount and type of information received—the eye is 
Figure 2.1  The fundamental design of the specialized nerve cell, or neuron, has not 
changed for 500 million years.

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        37
especially important to the evolution of humans—and those that expanded 
the range of responses to the environment from the organism.
The evolution of the neuron facilitated the great explosion of complex 
animal life that took place in the early Cambrian period roughly 540 to 
520 million years ago. New forms included the worms, which exhibit a 
bilateral body plan (unlike the radial Cnidarians), with a defined head 
versus tail as well as dorsal and ventral sides. The first central nervous 
systems, comprising a brain in the head region and a nerve cord extend-
ing to the tail, developed in these phyla (Platyhelminthes and Annelida). 
The pattern of dorsal brain and ventral nerve cord was repeated in other 
phyla that emerged during the Cambrian explosion, including mollusks, 
crustaceans, and insects.12
Among these new phyla were the chordates (Chordata), which are dis-
tinguished by the embryonic development of a notochord. The first chor-
dates were invertebrate marine organisms, but they subsequently gave rise 
to marine and terrestrial vertebrates: reptiles, dinosaurs, birds, and mam-
mals with large complex brains. The living Amphioxus is thought to be rep-
resentative of the earliest chordates. It possesses structures that correspond 
to several major components of the vertebrate forebrain, including the 
frontal eyes and hypothalamus, as well as the hindbrain; both the nerve 
cord and the brain are dorsal. The frontal “eye spot” in Amphioxus contains 
pigmented cells that seem to anticipate the vertebrate eye.13
Like the mind, the evolutionary process is creative. Although its prod-
ucts are the result of natural selection acting on randomly generated varia-
tion, novel forms are often characterized as “innovations.”14 The evolution 
of the early vertebrates, which began about 470 million years ago, follow-
ing the end of the Cambrian, entailed a number of such innovations criti-
cal to the development of large brains. One of them was the neural crest, 
which eventually gave rise to the cranium, jaws, and teeth. Another was 
the protein hemoglobin, which plays an important role in meeting the high 
oxygen needs of the brain. Yet another was myelin, sheets of protein and fat 
molecules that insulate the axon and improve its conductivity. Insulated 
neurons can be packed into a small area to form a dense network.15
The early vertebrates evolved frontal eyes and nostrils, as well as several 
related brain components: the telencephalon and midbrain (mesencepha-
lon) and the cerebellum (figure 2.2). The telencephalon contains expanded 
olfactory receptors, reflecting heavy reliance on the sense of smell. Of great 
significance for later brain evolution was the emergence of the midbrain, 
with optic tectum for receiving visual information and integrating data from 

38         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
other senses. The cerebellum also plays a role in vision by stabilizing visual 
representation as the head moves.16 Successful early vertebrates included 
the sharks, whose comparatively large brains probably are related to the 
substantial information needs of a large predator. The first terrestrial ver-
tebrates (amphibians) emerged from the sea about 350 million years ago, 
and reptiles evolved roughly 300 million years ago.17
Disaster struck 50 million years later, at the end of the Paleozoic era, 
with the most massive wave of extinctions in Earth history, probably a 
result of cooler climates. Ninety percent of the known fossil taxa vanished. 
However, the ecological vacuum opened opportunities for the evolution 
and proliferation of novel life-forms. On land, much of this vacuum was 
filled by warm-blooded vertebrates, including dinosaurs, birds, and—by 
220 million years ago—mammals. The enormous energy demands of main-
taining a constant body temperature seem to have been a principal factor 
in the evolution of bigger brains. Warm-blooded vertebrates need a large 
amount of accurate and detailed information about their environment.18
Among the mammals, this need was addressed in part by an evolution-
ary innovation in brain structure that was critical to the subsequent emer-
gence of the mind. The neocortex—a uniquely mammalian feature—is a six-
layer, sheet-like structure that covers the roof of the forebrain. Each layer is 
connected to other parts of the brain. The neocortex receives, integrates, 
and stores information about the environment from the various senses. 
Another innovation was a chain of ossicles that conducts sound from the 
eardrum to the inner ear, allowing mammals to hear high frequencies.19
Figure 2.2  The basic vertebrate brain evolved more than 400 million years ago. A signifi-
cant development was the appearance of the midbrain, with the optic tectum for receiv-
ing visual sensory input and integrating information from other senses.

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        39
The brain had acquired a new function especially evident in mammals. 
It was no longer simply identifying changes in the environment and coordi-
nating appropriate responses to them. The information acquired through 
the senses and stored in the neuronal networks had become an essential 
part of how organisms survived and reproduced; learning and memory 
were now playing a role analogous to those of the genetically controlled 
(and naturally selected) structures of the body. Unlike fish and reptiles, 
mammals (as well as birds) require extensive parental care during the early 
phases of life, which reflects the increased importance of information.
The Visual Animal
Most primate-typical features involve the visual system.
Georg F. Striedter
The primates are a group of placental mammals that evolved from insec-
tivores toward the close of the Mesozoic era, about 75 million years ago, 
and apparently occupied arboreal niches in what is now North America 
and Europe. They diversified after another massive wave of extinctions 
wiped out the dinosaurs in the late Cretaceous period. The early primates 
had small brains, long snouts, and laterally placed eyes, but forms resem-
bling the living prosimians—tarsiers, lemurs, and lorises—were present 
by roughly 50 million years ago (Eocene epoch). They possessed larger 
brains with smaller olfactory bulbs (indicating reduced reliance on smell), 
more-forward-facing eyes, and long digits with nails instead of claws. These 
trends continued among the early catarrhines—a group that includes Old 
World monkeys and apes—during the Oligocene epoch, which began 
about 35 million years ago.20
Evolutionary innovations in brain structure, especially related to 
vision, in the Eocene primates took place among the catarrhines and 
were critical to the emergence of the mind. The neocortex expanded in 
size and in proportion to the brain as a whole. In the small prosimian 
Galago demidovii, the neocortex comprises 46 percent of brain volume; 
among living chimpanzees, the neocortex occupies no less than 76 per-
cent of the brain.21 This surely reflected integration and storage of more 
information about the environment, but perhaps specifically more infor-
mation about the social environment. Among primates, the ratio of the 
neocortex to total brain volume correlates significantly with the size of 
the social group.22

40         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
The primates evolved a complex of interrelated changes pertaining to 
vision, visual representation, and the visual coordination of muscle activ-
ity. The density of photoreceptors in the retina increased. The visual cortex 
of the brain expanded significantly. The optic tectum of the midbrain was 
restructured in relation to the overlapping fields of vision created by front-
facing eyes. It functioned in a more specialized manner to allow primate 
eyes to fixate on objects of interest. In the forebrain, new components of 
the visual system improved the perception of motion and of the form of 
objects. Perhaps most important of all with reference to the subsequent 
evolution of the human hand was the development of a cortical area, 
unknown in other mammals, for the visual coordination of motor tasks.23
The catarrhines “reinvented” color vision. Most mammals possess lim-
ited color vision based on two types of cone photoreceptors. One of these 
cone types is sensitive to shorter wavelengths of light (blue portion of spec-
trum), while the other is sensitive to longer wavelengths (red portion of 
spectrum). As a result of a gene duplication, the ancestor of living catar-
rhines evolved a third cone type, which had been present among earlier 
mammals. Human vision is catarrhine vision.24
More than any other feature or complex of features, it seems, the visual 
system distinguishes the primates from other mammals. Why did it evolve 
so significantly in this group? The forward-facing eyes and overlapping 
fields of vision have been interpreted as part of an arboreal adaptation.25 
They also have been ascribed to predation on small, fast-moving vertebrates 
and insects.26 Perhaps both explanations are valid. The (re)appearance of 
color vision among the catarrhines has been tied to their reliance on fruit 
and the need to identify it against a backdrop of green foliage.27 The rather 
generalized adaptations of the higher primates may have placed an added 
premium on a visual system that provides so much information about 
the environment.28 But another contributing factor seems likely to have 
been the growing importance of visual cues (and corresponding decline of 
chemical signals) in primate society, especially facial expressions.29
A theory of human vision was articulated by David Marr in 1982 and 
remains an important contribution to neuroscience.30 Marr placed primary 
emphasis on vision as information processing and on the creation of visual 
representations in the brain.31 He characterized the process as hierarchi-
cal and recursive, and the psychologist Michael Corballis later noted the 
parallels between Marr’s theory of vision and language—the generation of 
linguistic structures.32 According to Marr, visual information is processed 
through a sequence of stages that begins with the focusing of incoming 

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        41
light on the retina, the light-sensitive cells at the back of the eyeball (figure 
2.3). The retinal image is received in the form of a raw primal sketch, com-
prising a map of variations in light intensity; these variations are hierarchi-
cally grouped into larger units to form a full primal sketch. The next stage 
entails processing information about the shape, orientation, and distance 
of objects; Marr referred to it as the 2½-D sketch.33 In the final stage, or 
3-D model representation, the shapes and spatial arrangement of objects are 
organized hierarchically in an “object-centered coordinate frame.”34
Molecular differences between living apes and Old World monkeys sug-
gest divergence around 30 million years ago, although the earliest known 
ape fossils are dated to the beginning of the Miocene epoch (22 million 
years ago).35 Bones and teeth assigned to the genus Proconsul from Africa 
dominate the fossil record of early apes. Their analysis reveals that Procon-
sul was a mixture of ape and monkey characters—an arboreal quadruped as 
large as a modern female gorilla and lacking a tail. The skull is relatively 
ape-like in appearance, with fully forward-facing orbits and a shortened 
snout. Brain volume is calculated at just below 170 cubic centimeters, 
which is high for apes in relation to the small body size.36
During the middle Miocene (between roughly 18 and 12 million years 
ago), the apes underwent a dramatic expansion of their range, spreading 
out of Africa and across western and southern Eurasia. This was facilitated 
by tectonics as the African plate collided with the Eurasian plate, creating 
a new land connection between the continents. The apes diversified into 
many new genera. Among the European taxa was Dryopithecus—first dis-
covered in France in the 1850s—which exhibits more features in common 
with the living African apes than does Proconsul.37 It is a plausible ancestor 
for the living African apes and humans and presumably possessed a brain 
and visual system fundamentally similar to that of both.
Figure 2.3  A theory of human vision developed by David Marr in 1982 stresses informa-
tion processing and the recursive construction of mental visual representations, which 
seems to have been the foundation of the mind. (Modified from Michael C. Corballis, 
The Lopsided Ape: Evolution of the Generative Mind [New York: Oxford University Press, 
1991], 220, fig. 9.1, based on David Marr, Vision: A Computational Investigation into the 
Human Representation and Processing of Visual Information [San Francisco: Freeman, 1982])

42         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
The Somesthetic Animal: Bipedalism and the Human Hand
[I]n the human race, a perfect tactual apparatus subserves the highest 
processes of the intellect . . . the most far-reaching cognitions, and 
inferences the most remote from perception have their roots in the 
definitely-combined impression which the human hands can receive.
Herbert Spencer
When Carolus Linnaeus published his systematic classification of plants 
and animals in 1753, he placed humans and the great apes in the same 
genus. Humans were classified as Homo sapiens, and chimpanzees and 
orangutans (gorillas were unknown to him) as Homo troglodytes. The deci-
sion to assign apes and humans to the same genus was based entirely on 
comparative anatomy and the already well-known morphological similari-
ties between apes and humans. It did not reflect evolutionary relationships 
and was not a shocking idea.38
In the latter half of the nineteenth century, Darwin, Huxley, and oth-
ers made the case for an evolutionary relationship—a common lineage—
between apes and humans. This was a shocking idea for many people. In 
any case, the apes had been moved to another genus or genera and even 
into a separate family. In the twentieth century, as more of the human 
fossil record was recovered, the evolutionary divergence between apes 
and humans was eventually placed in the middle of the Miocene epoch, 
roughly 15 million years ago.
By the mid-1960s, however, studies of the molecular differences between 
living apes and humans suggested a much later split between the two. The 
fossils were subsequently reinterpreted and fell into line with the results 
of the molecular research. In more recent years, new molecular studies 
have yielded further evidence of the close relationship between humans 
and the African apes, placing both in a group apart from the Asian apes, 
or orangutans. (Humans have lost their classificatory status as a separate 
family.) And within the evolutionary clade that contains African apes and 
humans, chimpanzees and humans compose an even tighter group. This 
classification is based on both anatomical and genetic comparisons.39 We 
have almost returned to where Linnaeus was in 1753.
The close relationship between chimpanzees and humans also is mani-
fest in some aspects of behavior and ecology. In contrast to gorillas, chim-
panzees forage over relatively open landscapes, engage in some hunting, 
and make a few simple tools. Their foraging adaptations and toolmaking, 

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        43
when combined with their anatomical and genetic overlap with humans, 
suggest that they probably resemble in many ways the last common ancestor 
of apes and humans. Despite this, both chimpanzees and gorillas evolved 
some features that probably were not present in this (still unknown) com-
mon ancestor. One of them is the unique mode of quadrupedal locomo-
tion, knuckle walking, practiced by the African apes.40
There are inevitable gaps in the fossil record. Darwin attributed them to 
sampling and preservation bias—that is,  “the imperfection of the geologi-
cal record.”41 The problem may be further exacerbated by intervals of very 
rapid evolutionary change, or “punctuated equilibria.”42 There is neverthe-
less at least a broad evolutionary continuum from insectivores through 
prosimians and monkeys to apes and humans with respect to anatomy, 
genetics, and ecology. There are no massive gaps, for example, between 
Eocene prosimians and Miocene apes. But an immense gulf seems to lie 
between the cognitive world of the chimpanzee and the human mind—a 
difference that appears comparable to, if not greater than, that between 
prosimians and apes or, for that matter, between early chordates and pla-
cental mammals.43
How and why did the human mind emerge from the Miocene ape brain? 
How was the immense gulf crossed? Intermediate forms in the human fos-
sil record fill much of the gap with respect to anatomy (and the genetic 
differences, as already noted, are not substantial). They include various 
fossil forms of Homo that reflect a continuum with respect to brain vol-
ume, which is undoubtedly a critical factor in the emergence of the mind. 
Equally important, there appear to be intermediate forms with respect to 
the mind, although they are more difficult to identify and interpret in the 
fossil record.
The short answer to the question is that early humans evolved a 
uniquely specialized extremity in the form of the hand, most likely an 
indirect consequence of bipedalism. The large neocortex and visual-motor 
system that had evolved over millions of years of primate evolution pro-
vided an essential context for this development. Humans eventually began 
to produce artifacts more sophisticated than those made by chimpanzees 
from which emerged the first externalized mental representations. They 
were relatively simple and exhibited little creativity, but they seem to have 
initiated a process—driven, I would suggest, by feedback between internal 
and external thought—that resulted in larger brains and more complex and 
creative representations. The social setting, the exchange of representa-
tions among members of the group, also must have been a factor in the 

44         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
process. The modern mind emerged when the ability to generate complex 
representations was expanded from hand to vocal tract in the form of syn-
tactic language, creating the super-brain and unlimited creative potential.
Bipedal locomotion, or walking upright on two limbs, was the starting 
point, although for most of the time span that humans have walked the 
Earth, it had no significant consequences for brain volume. Bipedalism is 
equated with the evolutionary split between humans and African apes; it 
made the former out of the latter, and early humans have sometimes been 
described as bipedal apes. The early fossil record of humankind is very 
sparse, however, and the possibility cannot be excluded that the human 
lineage diverged from a chimpanzee-like ancestor for another reason and 
that bipedal locomotion came later. And it is also possible that bipedalism 
evolved among one or more extinct African apes that were not ancestral to 
humans. It is nevertheless the key feature that paleoanthropologists seek to 
identify among the few fossil remains of suspected human affiliation that 
are more than 3 to 4 million years old.
Bipedalism is an extremely rare form of locomotion among mammals, 
although like other features peculiar to humans it has roots in primate evo-
lution—the upright posture found among apes, monkeys, and some prosim-
ians. Most mammals are quadrupeds, and there are disadvantages attached 
to walking on the hind limbs. Around the world, humans struggle with 
the consequences in the form of knee-joint problems, back injuries, and 
related health issues. The advantages of bipedalism appear to be limited. 
A frequently cited study by Peter Rodman and Henry McHenry found 
that while it is less energy efficient than quadrupedalism at high speeds, 
bipedal locomotion is more efficient at slower (that is, walking) speeds.44 
Other possible advantages include reduced body-surface area exposed to 
the sun, improved ability to see predators in tall-grass habitats, and better 
capacity to carry objects.45
How and why did human bipedalism evolve? Although most paleoan-
thropologists believe that it had profound consequences for humankind—
freeing the hands for improved toolmaking and all that followed—they 
suspect that it evolved for more prosaic reasons related to the immediate 
foraging challenges faced by Miocene apes. A widely held view, buttressed 
by Rodman and McHenry’s study, is that bipedalism provided an energy-
efficient means of foraging across landscapes with a low or medium density 
of trees. Climates became cooler and drier toward the end of the Miocene 
(roughly 8 million years ago), and many of the ape genera went extinct. 
In sub-Saharan Africa, forests shrank while grassland and open woodland 

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        45
expanded. The earliest humans may have evolved from Dryopithecus or a 
closely related African ape that spent an increasing amount of time forag-
ing on the ground.46
The shift to bipedal locomotion affected many parts of the skeleton, 
not simply the limbs. In comparison with that in the African apes, the 
foramen magnum (through which the brainstem extends at the base of 
the skull to connect with the spinal cord) rotated forward, as the skull 
came to sit on top of the vertebral column, which, in turn, acquired an 
S-shaped curve. The pelvis became broader and shorter. The angle of the 
femur (thigh bone) was significantly altered. The lower limbs were elon-
gated and the joint-surface areas expanded. The foot acquired a platform 
shape to support the upright body (figure 2.4). The changes in the bones 
were accompanied by changes in the musculature.47
Figure 2.4  Bipedalism altered many elements of human anatomy and consequently has 
high visibility in the fossil record. The skeleton represents a reconstructed Australopithecus 
afarensis. (Redrawn from Richard G. Klein, The Human Career: Human Biological and Cul-
tural Origins, 3rd ed. [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009], 69, fig. 3.3)

46         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
The many changes in the skeleton mandated by the shift from quadru-
pedal to bipedal locomotion underscore the complexity of the transition, 
which probably took place over an extended period and, initially, perhaps 
was related to feeding posture.48 The myriad anatomical changes generated 
by the shift to bipedalism also yields a dividend for paleoanthropology—
high visibility in a sparse and fragmentary fossil record. There are many 
potential signs of bipedalism in bones of suspected human affiliation dat-
ing to more than 3 to 4 million years ago, and paleoanthropologists search 
among them for these indicators.
The oldest potential signs of bipedalism presently lie in fossils dating 
to roughly 6 to 7 million years ago from west-central Africa assigned to 
the newly created taxon Sahelanthropus tchadensis (figure 2.5). The fossils 
Figure 2.5  Map of fossil localities and archaeological sites in Africa, mentioned in the 
text, that date to between 7 and 2 million years ago.

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        47
include a nearly complete cranium, lower jaw fragments, and teeth. The 
shape of the cranium had been distorted by geologic processes, but was 
restored visually to its original form by means of software technology. The 
short face, small canine teeth, and thick enamel on the teeth are human 
(as opposed to modern ape) characteristics. Most important, the position 
of the foramen magnum may reflect bipedal locomotion.49
The next oldest possibility dates to about 6 million years ago from 
northern Kenya. Fossils assigned to another new taxon, Orrorin tugenensis, 
comprise several limb bone fragments and teeth. In this case, the focus has 
been on the morphology of the femur, which exhibits a human-like angle 
an and elongated neck.50 Computerized tomography scans may indicate a 
human-like distribution of cortical bone thickness, but this is controver-
sial.51 More recent fossils from Ethiopia, dating to between 5.7 and 4.4 mil-
lion years ago, are classified as Ardipithecus. The youngest of these, assigned 
to Ardipithecus ramidus, include postcranial remains that reflect a primitive 
form of bipedalism.52
More human-like locomotion is found in the earliest fossils assigned 
to Australopithecus. Among the postcranial bones from two sites in Kenya 
dating to 4.2 to 3.9 million years ago and assigned to Australopithecus ana-
mensis are a humerus (upper arm bone) and a tibia (lower leg bone) of a 
bipedal human.53 Especially powerful evidence of upright walking comes 
from Laetoli (Tanzania), where footprints—presumably made by australo-
pithecines—were preserved in volcanic ash deposits dating to about 3.6 
million years ago.54
Between 4 and 2 million years ago, australopithecines dominate the 
human fossil record. These early humans diversified into several species 
that occupied various ecological niches in sub-Saharan Africa, and one 
of them apparently was the direct ancestor of the genus Homo and mod-
ern humans. The early australopithecines are best known from the “Lucy” 
skeleton, discovered at Hadar (Ethiopia) by Donald Johanson in 1974 and 
eventually classified as Australopithecus afarensis. Lucy is roughly 3.2 mil-
lion years old and represents a small ape-like human that walked upright 
but retained some striking arboreal adaptations: long chimpanzee-like fore-
arms, a grasping foot, and curved fingers. Lucy evidently spent much of 
her time in trees. Her brain remained small (400 to 500 cubic centimeters) 
and only slightly larger, relative to her body size, than that of a modern 
chimpanzee.55
The most important developments in human evolution during this 
period concern changes in the anatomy and function of the hand. Until 

48         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
the appearance of the earliest Homo roughly 2.5 million years ago, there 
were no significant increases in brain size above that of the African apes, 
and there are no known stone artifacts. But changes in the morphology 
of the hand reflect a protracted transformation from a Miocene ape to a 
modern human hand, which was apparently completed by about 1.5 mil-
lion years ago. This development—as critical as any to the emergence of 
the mind—was a logical consequence of bipedalism, which freed up the 
forelimbs for novel functions.
The evolved human hand is a remarkably sensitive, versatile, and pre-
cise instrument for translating internal thought to the external world.56 
As Vernon Mountcastle observed in The Sensory Hand: “Movements and 
positions of the hand . . . are produced by the actions of 35 muscles (or 
44 if one takes into account the three muscles that each have four inser-
tion tendons) that control the movements of the 27 bones of the hand 
at their joints.”57 The movements of the hand are coordinated in the 
neocortex with the equally remarkable system of color vision that evolved 
among the catarrhines. And the hand functions not only as an instru-
ment for effecting unusually sophisticated and subtle motor responses 
directed by the brain, but also as a sensory organ that gathers a special 
category of information from the external world. In this capacity, it is 
supported by a dense complex of nerve fibers in the glabrous (hairless) 
skin of the palm and fingers.58 Among humans, the hand acquired sen-
sory functions that seem to parallel those of catarrhine vision, providing 
three-dimensional hierarchically structured representations of the exter-
nal world through the tactile sense. Humans have become a somesthetic, 
as well as a visual, animal.59
The human hand is anatomically unique. As a consequence of bipedal-
ism, the human hand is fully specialized for manipulation. The anatomist 
John Russell Napier (1917–1987) noted that the hand plays a locomotor 
role only in early childhood, when it is used like a monkey “foot-hand” 
for quadrupedal movement. Napier emphasized the primary importance 
of finger–thumb opposition, which he considered “probably the single 
most crucial adaptation in our evolutionary history”: “Opposition is a 
movement by which the pulp surface of the thumb is placed squarely in 
contact—or diametrically opposite to—the terminal pads of one or all of 
the remaining digits.”60 It is made possible by rotation of the thumb and 
facilitated by a thumb that is long in relation to the other digits. Among 
primates, humans have evolved the highest ratio of thumb length to index 
finger length.61

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        49
Napier subdivided human hand movements into nonprehensile and 
prehensile. Nonprehensile movements include “pushing, lifting, tapping, 
and punching movements of the fingers, such as typewriting or working the 
stops of a musical instrument.”62 Prehensile movements, such as gripping 
or pinching action between the fingers and thumb, include two primary 
and two subsidiary grips. The primary grips are the precision grip between 
the terminal pad of the thumb and the tips of one or more fingers, and 
the power grip between the fingers and the palm with the thumb providing 
reinforcement. The subsidiary grips are the hook grip, with the terminal 
joints bent acutely, and the scissor grip for grasping objects between the 
fingers (figure 2.6). The specialized skin of the hand, with its papillary 
ridges and sweat glands, also plays an important role in the grasping and 
manipulation of objects.63
While the range of hand movements is expanded by movements of the 
wrist, forearm, elbow joint, and shoulder joint, and even other parts of the 
skeleton, the basic movements, as Napier noted, are few.64 But the variety 
of combinations of movements and the variety of material structures that 
Figure 2.6  The basic grips of the human hand as defined by the anatomist John Rus-
sell Napier. (Redrawn by Ian T. Hoffecker, from Leslie Aiello and Christopher Dean, An 
Introduction to Human Evolutionary Anatomy [London: Academic Press, 1990], 372, fig. 18.1)

50         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
may be generated by hand movements coordinated by the modern human 
brain are potentially unlimited. The range of basic movements is analo-
gous to the range of sounds that humans can produce with the vocal tract; 
it is a set of building blocks for a potentially infinite array of hierarchi-
cally organized technological creations. And through gesture, drawing, and 
writing, the role of the hands has been expanded to one similar to that of 
the vocal tract—the externalization of symbolically coded representations.
Like the other unique elements of human anatomy, the hand has deep 
evolutionary roots in the primates. The living primates are among the few 
groups of mammals that carry food to their mouths (as opposed to bring-
ing their mouths to food),65 and as early as the Eocene, the fossil ances-
tors of modern prosimians had evolved grasping hands with nails instead 
of claws. Finger–thumb opposition appeared in the catarrhines, which 
eventually evolved a variety of specialized hand adaptations—all but one of 
which combines locomotor and manipulative functions.66
Fossil bones of the early Miocene African ape Proconsul reveal a hand 
that, like other aspects of its anatomy, combines typical ape and mon-
key features (figure 2.7).67 By the later Miocene (roughly 9.5 million years 
ago), a generic ape pattern is evident in hand bones of Dryopithecus from 
western Eurasia.68 The African apes subsequently evolved their own spe-
cialized hand, with shortened thumb and elongated fingers (for suspend-
ing from branches) and other features related to their peculiar knuckle-
walking locomotion.69 The later fossil record of African apes is extremely 
sparse, however, and the sequence of events that yielded the modern ape 
hand is unknown.
The early human fossil record also is sparse and fragmentary, and there 
are only isolated and rather ambiguous specimens (no hand bones) dating 
to the interval between 8 and 4.5 million years ago. The 4.4-million-year-
old hand and wrist bones of Ardipithecus ramidus, only recently unveiled in 
print, exhibit some novel features related to arboreal locomotion, but little 
indication of later trends.70 The earliest indication of subsequent changes 
appears 3.2 million years ago in East Africa with Australopithecus afarensis, 
represented by Lucy. Among the remains recovered from Hadar (Ethio-
pia) are more than fifty hand bones, including carpals, metacarpals, and 
phalanges (fingers).71 Analysis of these bones revealed many similarities 
to those of the living apes, including slender apical tufts (fingertips) on 
the ends of the phalanges. It also revealed some features lacking in apes 
but found among later humans, most notably a relatively long thumb (50 
percent of the length of the middle digit). Lucy probably was capable of 

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        51
some, but not all, of the grips and other hand movements performed by 
modern humans.72
The changes in hand morphology and function that took place 3.2 mil-
lion years ago were not accompanied by an increase in brain volume or 
evidence of stone-tool production. But after 2.6 million years ago, there 
were increases in brain size (in both earliest Homo and the robust australo-
pithecine Paranthropus), and stone tools are found in East Africa. Hand 
bones of early Homo associated with stone tools and dating to at least 1.75 
million years ago were recovered in 1960 by Louis and Mary Leakey at 
Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania). The bones were described by Napier himself, 
who noted the expanded apical tufts (broad fingertips), similar to those 
Figure 2.7  The evolution of the human hand.

52         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
of modern human fingers. But the Olduvai hand retains some ape-like 
features (for example, the morphology of the proximal and middle phalan-
ges), and Napier wondered if it had been capable of a full precision grip.73
Of comparable age to the Olduvai finds are hand bones from Swartkrans 
(South Africa), also associated with stone tools and tentatively assigned to 
Paranthropus robustus. These hand bones differ from the earlier australo-
pithecine pattern observed at Hadar and exhibit a number of human-like 
features, including expanded apical tufts like those of the Olduvai speci-
men.74 It is not certain, however, that these hand bones belong to Paran-
thropus, since some remains of Homo also are present in the deposits.75
The fully modern human hand seems to have evolved by roughly 1.5 
million years ago in Homo (both Homo ergaster and Homo erectus), although 
the supporting fossil evidence remains somewhat elusive. A few hand 
bones were recovered with a partial skeleton of Homo ergaster from Nari-
okotome (Kenya), which is dated to about 1.6 million years ago.76 While 
these isolated specimens provide a less complete portrait of the hand than 
do the bones from Hadar and Olduvai, they are essentially modern in size 
and shape (like the arm bones also found at Nariokotome) and probably 
reflect the arrival of the fully modern human hand.
From Pebble Tools to Bifaces:  
The Emergence of External Thought
Acheulean hand axes and other bifaces are a logical development 
from preceding Oldowan bifacial choppers.
Richard G. Klein
The turning point for humans took place between 2.6 and 1.6 million years 
ago in sub-Saharan Africa. It began with the earliest known stone tools 
(pebble tools and flakes) and ended with the emergence of externalized 
mental representations in the form of ovate bifacial artifacts, or hand axes. 
The first bifaces were simple and crude, barely distinguishable from some 
of the more heavily flaked cobbles and fragments of the preceding era. 
But within a few hundred thousand years, they became more refined; over 
the next million years, some hand axes were shaped with admirable preci-
sion (especially when the quality of the raw material permitted fine flaking 
control). The initial appearance of the bifaces is an event of fundamental 
importance for the origin of the human mind because it marks the begin-
ning of a relationship between internal and external representations.77

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        53
The hand axes emerged, I would suggest, as a consequence of the inter-
play between the brain and the stone tools that humans began to make 
2.6 million years ago, mediated by the sensory hand and internal visual 
representation. Most archaeologists do not recognize a gradual transition 
from the pebble-tool industry (termed Oldowan) to a stone-tool industry 
containing hand axes.78 The bifacial tools simply appear in the archaeologi-
cal record 1.6 million years ago in Africa, marking the beginning of the 
Acheulean industry. But even a cursory glance at Oldowan artifact assem-
blages reveals that the technique of bifacial flaking—shaping a piece of 
stone by chipping it on both sides—can be found throughout the history 
of this industry, including the earliest known assemblages.79 Many of the 
partially bifacial artifacts of the Oldowan (some of which are classified as 
“proto-bifaces”) resemble crude hand axes to some degree and simply lack 
a discernible ovate form.80
It is impossible to verify the thesis that hand axes were a consequence 
of interaction between the early human brain and Oldowan toolmaking, 
but it seems to be the most logical and parsimonious explanation of their 
origin. An alternative explanation would be that the production of bifaces 
was triggered by an event outside the realm of the Oldowan brain and its 
tools—for example, a previously untapped food source that required an 
ovate bifacial tool for successful exploitation. Even in this case, however, 
the earlier history of Oldowan toolmaking probably would constitute an 
essential prerequisite to hand-ax manufacture. Moreover, I am not con-
vinced that the ovate design of hand axes was critical to their function. 
The analysis of microscopic wear patterns on their edges indicates that 
many bifaces were used as tools, but it has yet to be demonstrated that the 
same tasks could not be performed with Oldowan tools.81
The appearance of the bifaces 1.6 million years ago also marks the emer-
gence of what I have called the proto-mind. The term is applied to the 
cognitive apparatus of the humans who made bifacial artifacts before the 
appearance of anatomically modern humans and evidence of modernity 
or the modern mind (which occurred after 250,000 years ago). Most, if 
not all, of these humans can be assigned to Homo ergaster and a younger, 
larger-brained species often classified as Homo heidelbergensis. They evolved 
the unique ability to externalize mental representations in the form of 
stone artifacts—as well as probably other artifacts made from materials that 
have not been preserved in the archaeological record—but lacked the cre-
ativity of modern humans. They continued to produce the same external 
representation, the ovate biface, with only minor variations for more than 

54         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
a million years. In another respect, however, the proto-mind was similar 
to the modern mind: it was a collective phenomenon that entailed the 
sharing of one or more mental representations among individuals. The 
proto-mind was almost certainly a requisite precursor and stepping-stone 
to the modern mind.
If the identity of the makers of Acheulean bifaces is well established, the 
identity of those who made the Oldowan artifacts remains controversial. 
There is consensus that people assigned to the genus Homo—which first 
appeared at this time—made stone tools, but several other human taxa 
in sub-Saharan Africa are associated with Oldowan artifacts or evidence 
for artifact use. The remains of a gracile australopithecine (Australopithecus 
garhi) were found with mammal bones that exhibit traces of stone-tool 
damage, and it has been suggested that this species made the 2.6-million-
year-old tools at nearby Gona (Ethiopia).82 The remains of a robust aus-
tralopithecine (Paranthropus) are associated with artifacts in younger depos-
its at Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania) and Swartkrans (South Africa), and the 
bones from Swartkrans included some from the hand.83
The importance of the human hand is underscored by some experi-
mental research suggesting that much of Oldowan tool production lay 
beyond the abilities of the African apes. Beginning in 1990, several pygmy 
chimpanzees (bonobos) were trained to flake stone tools at the Language 
Research Center at Georgia State University. The apes struck cobbles with 
hammerstones and produced sharp flakes. Although many of their arti-
facts resemble Oldowan forms, comparison with the 2.6-million-year-old 
Gona tools revealed significant differences. The chimpanzees were unable 
to produce flakes of the same quality or quantity from a cobble.84 Their 
brains are of comparable size to those of the australopithecines and not 
much smaller than those of earliest Homo, so the more constrained move-
ment of their hands probably accounts for some of the contrast. Another 
factor related to bipedalism is that, from the outset, the quality of the 
Oldowan tools reflects the selection and transport (that is, carrying in the 
hands) of high-quality stone from its sources.85
The early Oldowan sites are found in eastern Africa, and, after 2 mil-
lion years ago, they also appear in southern Africa. By 1.8 million years 
ago, Oldowan sites are present in southwestern Eurasia; sites containing 
similar artifacts are known from northern China by about 1.7 million 
years ago.86 In eastern Africa, Oldowan sites are typically found along the 
banks of streams and shores of lakes. In southern Africa, they have been 

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        55
discovered in limestone cave fillings that may contain a mixture of human 
occupation remains, carnivore accumulations, and debris simply washed 
in from the surrounding area. At the time, African landscapes were becom-
ing drier, with more extensive grassland and fewer trees, while animal life 
was undergoing significant change (that is, extinctions and new species).87
The interpretation of the Oldowan artifacts has been debated for years. 
The most widely used approach to classify the tools was proposed by Mary 
Leakey. Reflecting a traditional functional typological interpretation (at 
least with respect to many of the artifacts), she assigned the artifacts to 
categories such as chopper and scraper.88 In 1985, Nicholas Toth published a 
classic paper on Oldowan artifacts that emphasized the processes of man-
ufacture over the definition of formal types. Toth suggested that formal 
“types” may not have existed in the minds of the toolmakers and that the 
Oldowan typological classification had been imposed on a continuum of 
fractured cobbles and flakes (figure 2.8).89 These seemingly arcane discus-
sions of artifact classification among archaeologists carry heavy implica-
tions for human cognition. If the Oldowan tools were not shaped in accor-
dance with mental representations (or “mental templates”), the bifaces that 
emerged after 1.6 million years ago—which almost certainly do reflect such 
a template—constitute a fundamentally new and different phenomenon.
The Oldowan industry comprises (1) percussors, or heavy stones used to 
strike other pieces of stone; (2) variously shaped cores, from which flakes 
were struck; and (3) the flakes themselves, which also vary in size and 
shape. Many artifact assemblages also contain (4) retouched flakes, or flakes 
that were chipped along the edges. According to the traditional classifi-
cation, retouched flakes are often assigned to functional type categories 
such as awl and side-scraper, but also may simply represent variations on 
a continuum of chipping. Nevertheless, retouched flakes become more 
common in Oldowan sites after 2 million years ago. Much of the spatial 
and temporal variation in the assemblages appears to reflect differences in 
the stone used for artifact manufacture or, more specifically, differences 
in how various stones fracture. Commonly used stone included volcanic 
lavas and ignimbrites, as well as quartz and quartzite; cherts and flints are 
less common.90
The making and using of Oldowan tools was driven by human ecol-
ogy. The tools seem to have played a critical role in allowing early humans 
to occupy an ecological niche that entailed a significant consumption of 
meat, especially meat obtained from large mammals. Some sites contain 

56         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
Figure 2.8  Stone tools of the Oldowan industry, classified as unifacial choppers, from 
Upper Bed I at Olduvai Gorge that do not appear to reflect the imposition of a mental 
template on a piece of rock. (From Mary D. Leakey, Olduvai Gorge, vol. 3, Excavations in 
Beds I and II, 1960–1963 [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971], 77, fig. 40. 
Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press)
the bones of various large mammals, many of which exhibit traces of dam-
age from cobbles or heavy tools (used to smash them open for marrow) 
and/or sharp flakes (used to strip off meat).91 Analysis of microscopic wear 
on the edges of tools from Koobi Fora (Kenya) revealed that some were 
used for cutting meat (although others yielded traces of woodworking 
and cutting soft plant materials).92 And at least some of the large-mammal 

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        57
bones in Oldowan sites were derived from fresh carcasses, not leftovers 
abandoned by carnivores, and may reflect hunting or aggressive scaveng-
ing.93 In sum, the Oldowan tools were made and used for very practical 
purposes, and they probably paved the way for early human expansion into 
new habitats and climate zones in Eurasia.
Many Oldowan sites have been discovered and excavated since 1971, 
when Mary Leakey published her volume on the artifacts from Oldu-
vai Gorge. Nevertheless, the sequence of occupation levels at this most 
famous of early human sites still offers the best window on the emergence 
of external thought in the form of Lower Paleolithic bifacial stone artifacts. 
The occupation levels contain thousands of stone artifacts manufactured 
during the later Oldowan industry (roughly 2 to 1.5 million years ago) and 
the early Acheulean (roughly 1.5 to 1.2 million years ago). They represent 
the debris of human activities—utilized rocks, stone tools, and the waste 
products of toolmaking—scattered along the shore of an ancient lake that 
eventually retreated under drying conditions.94 As at many other Oldowan 
sites, the bones and teeth of mammals as well as other vertebrates are found 
with the stone artifacts. At least some of the large-mammal bones exhibit 
traces of tool damage and represent human food debris.95 The remains of 
both early Homo (H. habilis) and a robust australopithecine (Paranthropus 
boisei) are found in the occupations.
The major units in the lower part of the sequence at Olduvai Gorge (2 
to 1.2 million years ago) are, from the top down:
Upper Bed II	 	
	
	
	
Acheulean (bifaces)
Middle Bed II (upper part)	
	
	
Acheulean (bifaces)
Middle Bed II (lower part)	
	
	
Oldowan
Lower Bed II	 	
	
1.8 mya	 	
Oldowan
Upper Bed I	
	
	
	
	
Oldowan
Middle Bed I	 	
	
	
	
Oldowan
Lower Bed I	
	
	
2 mya	
	
Oldowan
The Oldowan assemblages represent the younger phases of the industry 
and yield a healthy quantity of retouched flakes. The upper levels of Bed 
II contain assemblages—in addition to those assigned to the Acheulean—
classified by Mary Leakey as “Developed Oldowan B” that include a small 
number of bifaces.96 Although the oldest bifaces in Africa are currently 
dated to about 1.7 to 1.6 million years ago,97 the earliest Acheulean levels 
in Bed II at Olduvai Gorge do not seem to be significantly younger and 

58         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
represent an early phase of the industry. The most common raw materials 
used in both industries are quartz and quartzite.
One reason that archaeologists do not perceive a gradual transition 
from Oldowan to Acheulean is that the traditional typological classifi-
cation forces individual artifacts into discrete categories. But as Nicho-
las Toth observed, many Oldowan tools actually occupy places along 
a continuum of variation.98 And while no formal bifaces have been 
identified among the assemblages below the upper part of Middle Bed 
II, there are many examples of bifacially flaked artifacts. They do not 
seem to reflect a mental template (although we can never be certain 
that this is the case), but they were partially and sometimes completely 
flaked; that is, there are no traces of cortex or the original weathered 
surface of the cobbles. In Lower Bed I, all the “choppers” were bifa-
cially flaked to create a working edge, and some were completely flaked 
on all sides. Tools classified as discoids also exhibit bifacial working and 
sometimes complete flaking, creating a symmetrical appearance. And 
in what may represent a significant trend, proto-bifaces (“intermediate 
between a biface and a chopper”) become more common in the upper  
levels (figure 2.9).99
The bifacial tools in the early Acheulean levels at Olduvai Gorge and 
elsewhere are relatively crude in appearance—some are incompletely flaked 
and retain cortex—and the differences between them and many Oldowan 
tools are not dramatic. Nevertheless, when viewed as a group, the ovate 
artifacts in these and later Acheulean levels reveal a consistent pattern 
imposed on large flakes or cobbles that departs from the generally random 
shape of Oldowan tools (figure 2.10). They are subdivided into three types 
found throughout the Acheulean: hand axes, cleavers, and picks. All three 
exhibit an ovate form in plan view and cross section.100
The sequence of assemblages at Olduvai Gorge illustrates that humans 
were producing a variety of flaked-stone artifact shapes for hundreds of 
thousands of years before the emergence of formal bifaces. The experi-
ments with the pygmy chimpanzees suggest that humans had evolved an 
unprecedented degree of control over the flaking process with their highly 
specialized sensory hands. Even more important, the analysis of stone arti-
facts from a 2.3-million-year-old site in Kenya indicates dynamic interac-
tion between the brain of the toolmaker and the raw material. By refitting 
flakes and cores at Lokalalei 2C, Hélène Roche and her colleagues dis-
covered that the Oldowan toolmakers were diagnosing—and correcting—

Figure 2.9  Stone tools of the Oldowan industry from the lower part of Middle Bed II 
at Olduvai Gorge that were flaked on more than one side. Classified as proto-bifaces, 
they seem to anticipate the flaking techniques used to produce the bifacial tools of the 
Acheulean industry. (From Mary D. Leakey, Olduvai Gorge, vol. 3, Excavations in Beds I 
and II, 1960–1963 [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971], 101–102, figs. 51, 52. 
Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press)

60         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
imperfections in the surface of the area of the stone from which the flakes 
were struck.101
The ovate form, I suggest, was a result of the feedback between repre-
sentations of the artifacts in the brain and the artifacts themselves. Each 
time an individual flaked a piece of stone, he or she created a series of 
new visual and tactile representations of the artifact—a nonverbal form of 
talking to oneself.102 Some early humans eventually reversed the process 
and worked the stone in accordance with an internal representation. It 
was a simple three-dimensional geometric form, initially imposed rather 
clumsily on pieces of rock, shared among individuals in space and time 
that became a social mental phenomenon.103
Why did early Homo start to make bifacial artifacts or, more specifically, 
bifacial artifacts shaped in accordance with a preconceived form? The ques-
tion is a long-standing one among archaeologists, and a definitive answer 
has yet to be given. Most assume that there is a functional explanation for 
bifaces: they were made to perform one or more functions that could not 
be performed with Oldowan tools, or at least not performed as efficiently 
with Oldowan tools. This assumption is supported by microscopic traces 
Figure 2.10  Bifacial tools, or hand axes, of the early Acheulean industry from Upper Bed 
II at Olduvai Gorge reflect an artificial or a semantic mental representation imposed 
on the rock. (From Mary D. Leakey, Olduvai Gorge, vol. 3, Excavations in Beds I and II, 
1960–1963 [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971], 206, fig. 97. Reprinted with 
the permission of Cambridge University Press)

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        61
of use-wear on the edges of some bifaces. It nests comfortably within an 
evolutionary biology framework for human evolution: bifaces were adap-
tive and enhanced the long-term reproductive success of the humans who 
made and used them.
A variety of functions have been proposed. A widely held view is 
that bifaces were used primarily to butcher large mammals. The heavy 
tools seem to be particularly suitable for chopping through limb joints, 
and there is supporting evidence from both microwear studies and the 
repeated association of bifaces with the remains of butchered carcasses. 
Another suggestion is that they were used to dig through hard soil to 
obtain plant roots or other buried resources. Some archaeologists argue 
that bifaces were multipurpose tools—that is, Lower Paleolithic Swiss 
Army knives—or that they also served as cores, a portable source of  
fresh flakes.104
One proposed function that emphasizes the shape of bifaces is that 
they were used as projectiles. According to this view, their design reflects 
aerodynamic considerations and is tied to the evolution of throwing. It 
has been advocated with particular vigor by the neuroanatomist Wil-
liam Calvin, who argued that the neural pathways involved in throwing 
objects provided a basis for the subsequent evolution of syntactic lan-
guage abilities.105
The initial appearance of bifaces in Africa was broadly coincident 
with some changes in human anatomy and ecology. The remarkable skel-
eton from Nariokotome (Kenya) dates to about 1.6 million years ago, 
and a lower jaw was found with early Acheulean artifacts at Konso (Ethi-
opia). These fossils belong to Homo ergaster (sometimes they are assigned 
to the closely related Homo erectus). They reflect an increase in brain 
size—almost 30 percent larger than the mean for Homo habilis—although 
the significance of this is mitigated by an almost equal increase in over-
all body size. More important, Homo ergaster was essentially modern 
from the neck down. The tree-climbing adaptations of the australopith-
ecines and earliest Homo are absent, and the hand may be fully modern 
as well.106
The changes in human anatomy are almost certainly tied to changes in 
human ecology. Homo had expanded into new regions and climate zones 
in North Africa and mid-latitude Eurasia—as far as 40o North. Although 
climates were warmer than those of today, the movement north and out 
of Africa exposed humans to environments that were cooler, drier, more 

62         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
seasonal, and less biologically rich than those of tropical and subtropi-
cal Africa. Food was more dispersed in space and time. One response 
to this is an increase in foraging range; recent human foragers living in 
desert, tundra, or other resource-poor environments typically forage over 
very large areas during the year.107 The changes in postcranial anatomy 
provided Homo ergaster with a more efficient walking adaptation that 
probably reflects the demands of wider foraging. Another response is 
greater reliance on meat, a more efficient food source than a vegetarian 
diet (recent human foragers in higher latitude environments rely heavily 
on meat). The analysis of large-mammal remains from upper Bed II at 
Olduvai Gorge suggests a more intensified focus on meat about 1.5 mil-
lion years ago.108
The question is therefore twofold: Why did humans start to make 
formal bifaces, and how were these bifaces related to the changes in 
anatomy and ecology that took place at roughly the same time? On bal-
ance, the strongest case for biface function—supported by several lines 
of evidence—is that hand axes were used for large-mammal butchery. I 
think that it is important to bear in mind, however, that Oldowan tools 
were used effectively for the same purpose. And during the extended 
period when some humans were making bifaces in Africa and parts of 
Eurasia, other humans—especially in East Asia—continued to butcher 
large-mammal carcasses with pebble tools and flakes. Although clearly 
suitable for butchery, bifaces do not seem to have been essential for this 
task, and it is difficult to see how they conferred an advantage on those 
who made and used them. Moreover, the unworn edges of many Acheu-
lean bifaces reveal that a high percentage of them were either not used 
or used only lightly.109
Bifacial artifacts seem to have played no role in the initial expansion of 
Homo into Eurasia. The earliest sites in this part of the world were occu-
pied by people who made Oldowan tools. Formal bifaces did not appear 
in Eurasia until several hundred thousand years after humans had invaded 
new habitats outside the tropical zone. The oldest site outside Africa is 
Dmanisi (Republic of Georgia), where humans made Oldowan artifacts 
1.8 million years ago. Their skeletal remains reveal that they had already 
evolved the modern bipedal anatomy of Homo ergaster while retaining the 
small brain and body of Homo habilis.110
In sum, I would conclude—until a stronger case can be made for their 
technical and ecological significance—that the function of bifaces as tools 

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        63
was a secondary one. And when they were used as tools, I suggest, their 
symmetrical design contributed little to their function. The bifaces are 
not what they seem to be, and evolutionary biology does not provide an 
adequate framework to explain them. They are based on artificial represen-
tations generated in the brain, apparently by the mental manipulation of 
visual and tactile representations received from the external world through 
the eye and sensory hand. They are the product of daydreams. As such, 
they are a manifestation of the “emergent properties” of the mind alluded 
to in chapter 1 and probably cannot be fully accounted for in terms of the 
principles of evolutionary biology. Only a philosophy of mind perspective 
allows us to appreciate their significance.
The appearance of formal bifaces in the archaeological record 1.6 mil-
lion years ago strikes me as a major event in Earth history. It is analogous 
to the origin of life itself, which has no function in the context of the 
natural world; life is dynamic structure generated according to a set of 
properties that emerged with the formation of complex organic molecules 
in Precambrian times. The bifaces also reflect the emergence of new prop-
erties—in this case, arising out of the recently enlarged human brain, or 
what I have termed the proto-mind. If they have any analogy to the prod-
ucts of modern human culture, it might be to music, which also lacks any 
obvious function (although it has acquired various social and economic 
roles among modern human groups).
Making bifaces nevertheless requires both time and energy, and they 
must have conferred some advantage on their makers—even if subtle and 
indirect—in order to “pay for themselves” in the context of human evolu-
tionary biology. Otherwise, it seems that the cost of making them, espe-
cially when so many were either unused or under-used, would have con-
ferred a disadvantage on their makers. Not only was biface making a habit 
that lasted for more than a million years, but the makers and/or the habit 
spread geographically—from Africa to the Near East by 1.4 million years 
ago. It is necessary to explain why humans who found the visual–tactile 
structure of a biface so pleasing prospered and multiplied.
Looking ahead in time, it is clear that the externalization of mental 
representations, especially after humans evolved the capacity to create 
increasingly complex representations in the form of technology, eventu-
ally conferred immense advantages. By externalizing complex mental rep-
resentations in the form of language and other symbolic media, members 
of a group would eventually share complex thoughts among themselves,  

64         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
creating a super-brain with unlimited generative powers, which had 
extraordinary consequences for them as living organisms. All subsequent 
developments in the emergence of the mind took place among the direct 
descendents of the biface makers. These developments provide some 
insight into why the making of bifaces more than a million years ago may 
not have been a waste of biological time.
While the bifaces themselves may have lacked practical value, day-
dreaming about bifaces may have been only one manifestation of the for-
mation of artificial mental representations, some of which may have had 
very practical value. Biface making may have been intimately linked to an 
array of other daydreams externalized in the form of artifacts not preserved 
in the Acheulean archaeological record. They could have included tools 
and devices fashioned from plant and animal material that had some con-
crete benefits to their makers—for example, containers for carrying objects. 
Some of the microscopic traces of edge-wear from soft plant parts, wood, 
and hide found on Acheulean stone artifacts may reflect the making of 
such items.
More generally, thinking about and making bifaces may have been con-
nected to the ability to think about something outside the immediate pres-
ent in space and time—to create a visual representation, for example, of 
an object or a place that is not the product of processing incoming signals 
from the retina. The practical consequences of this ability, even in a lim-
ited proto-mind form, could have been profound, especially for humans 
foraging over wide areas for foods that were becoming increasingly variable 
in both space and time. It would have helped to imagine situations, predict 
future events, and plan ahead.
Making bifaces also may have had some impact on social relations 
within and perhaps even between groups because humans were not only 
externalizing a representation with their hands, but also communicating it 
to all other humans who could receive that thought by processing signals 
from the retina. And one of the most striking characteristics of Acheulean 
bifaces is their sameness; everyone expressed the same thought. This may 
have had some impact on social relations—acting as a binding agent within 
groups—which, in turn, may have had an effect on foraging success. Other 
mental representations with a potential cohesive influence on social rela-
tions may have been expressed not only in materials lacking visibility in 
the archaeological record, but in nonmaterial form altogether—through 
vocalization, gesture, or dance.

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        65
Landscape of the Proto-Mind
[I]t would be difficult to overemphasize just how strange the handaxe 
is when compared to the products of modern culture.
Thomas Wynn
Evolutionary biology is not the only interpretive framework applied to 
Acheulean bifaces. Many archaeologists also have viewed them from a 
culture-historical perspective, assuming that bifaces were made according to 
a stylistic convention shared among people and communicated through 
generations as a cultural tradition. The archaeological literature contains 
many references to “Acheulean culture.”111 Unlike evolutionary biology, the 
culture-historical perspective is predicated (at least implicitly) on a philoso-
phy of mind. But it, too, suffers from shortcomings as an interpretive frame-
work for the Lower Paleolithic because it is based on the modern mind.
The hand axes or bifaces are almost certainly the product of a mind 
very different from our own. While unique among the animal kingdom, 
the mind of the biface makers lacked some fundamental properties of the 
modern mind. Much of the difference can be accounted for by the signifi-
cant contrast in brain size. The cranial volume of the early biface makers 
was between 800 and 1,100 cubic centimeters, which is roughly two-thirds 
the size of the modern human brain. Their brains would have contained 
billions of fewer neurons and an exponentially lower potential for synaptic 
connections. The fossil crania of Homo ergaster nevertheless tell us little 
about the pattern of thinking that lies behind the bifaces. It is the stuff 
of the archaeological record that provides most of the insights into this 
earlier form of mind that I term the proto-mind.
The archaeology required to explain the bifaces and the mind that cre-
ated them is also very different from the discipline established in the nine-
teenth century to classify and interpret the artifacts of the modern mind. 
It would be a variant of Colin Renfrew’s cognitive archaeology, designed to 
reconstruct or model a different mind on the basis of its external represen-
tations and their patterning in space and time. It is the sort of archaeology 
that would be needed to understand traces of an extinct form of intelligent 
life found on another planet.
Several major observations about the proto-mind emerge from the 
archaeological record of the Acheulean. The first is obvious and already 
discussed at length: the ability to create and externalize an artificial or a 

66         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
semantic representation. As noted at the beginning of this chapter, it is 
unclear if the shape of bifaces was inspired by a natural object, such as a 
leaf (figure 2.11). It would seem that their design was a geometric abstrac-
tion, like a square, that is unknown in the external world—that is, outside 
the brain. Perhaps we need look no further than their immediate source: 
the bifacially flaked Oldowan tools. In any case, the ovate biface was cre-
ated in the proto-mind and articulated by hand in analogical, or continu-
ous, form; it was not constructed from discrete elements like phonemes or 
numerals (although the process of shaping it by removing individual flakes 
has a digital character).
The bifaces of the Acheulean reveal that the proto-mind was capable 
of thinking about something beyond its internal state. They demonstrate 
the property of what philosophers of the mind have (rather confusingly) 
termed intentionality, or “that capacity of the mind by which mental 
states refer to, or are about, or are objects and states of affairs in the 
world other than themselves.”112 Despite the possibility or probability 
that the structure of the biface was generated in the proto-mind with 
limited reference to the external world, the fact that this representation 
was projected outside the head is a simple but unambiguous illustration 
Figure 2.11  Bifacial tools of the Acheulean industry, dating to less than 500,000 years 
ago, from Kalambo Falls (Zambia) exhibit finer symmetry and shaping than their prede-
cessors. (From J. Desmond Clark, Kalambo Falls Prehistoric Site III: The Earlier Cultures: 
Middle and Earlier Stone Age [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001], 337, fig. 6.6. 
Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press)

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        67
of intentionality. In this way, the bifaces are analogous to a spoken or 
written sentence.
The second major observation is that the proto-mind was severely lack-
ing in what Noam Chomsky identified as the “core property” of language—
the ability to creatively recombine the elements of externalized mental rep-
resentations to yield new structures in the same way that modern humans 
recombine words and sentences to create a potentially infinite array of 
meaning. The biface makers continued to produce essentially the same 
structure for more than a million years with relatively minor variation. It is 
as though they were speaking the same sentence over and over again with 
minor alterations in grammar and pronunciation.113 There was no history 
because there was no historical process to create it, and there was no cul-
ture, at least in the sense that this term is applied to modern humans. The 
proto-mind was analogous to an asexually reproducing organism.
There was, nevertheless, some variation in the size and shape of Acheu-
lean bifaces. In addition to the three most commonly recognized types (hand 
axes, cleavers, and picks), they include variants described as pointed, cor-
date, flat-butted, and ficron, among others.114 The analysis of the differences 
may provide insight into not only the proto-mind, but also the emergence of 
the modern mind. Just as Nicholas Toth addressed the question of whether 
the Oldowan tools reflect the imposition of a mental template, or an inter-
nal representation, on flakes and cobbles of stone, some archaeologists have 
attempted to determine if the people who made the Acheulean bifaces had 
more than one “type” in their minds. Beginning in the 1960s, François 
Bordes, Derek Roe, Glynn Isaac, and other Paleolithic specialists applied 
various measurements and quantitative analyses to samples of bifaces.115
The results of these studies reveal a consistent pattern. Despite the com-
mon perception that Acheulean bifaces fall into several types, analyses of 
large samples have shown that the various forms grade into one another 
on continuous scales of size and shape. It seems that there was only one 
rather general representation—subject to what Isaac described as a “ran-
dom walk” variation—in the proto-mind of the biface makers. Moreover, 
the variation seems to have been heavily influenced by the size and type 
of stone used and/or the degree to which flakes or cobbles were reduced 
by chipping. And it should be noted that the bifaces measured for these 
studies were derived primarily from later occurrences—archaeological sites 
that are less than a million years old—and that most probably were made by 
the larger-brained Homo heidelbergensis. Thus they do not reflect the early 
phases of the Acheulean.

68         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
In his analysis of bifaces at Olorgesailie (Kenya), Isaac noticed an inter-
esting pattern. Although as a whole, the bifaces exhibit the same pattern of 
continuous variation, specific variants or modes tended to cluster together 
at particular locations (figure 2.12). At one locality, for example, most 
bifaces were small, narrow, and relatively thick; at another, they were of 
intermediate length, contained many chisel-ended forms, and exhibited 
minimal retouching. Isaac wondered if a single individual had produced 
most of the bifaces at any one locality or if members of one family or social 
group had coalesced around a particular design mode within the broader 
spectrum of variation.116 
The same pattern has been noticed elsewhere117 and probably tells us 
something about the workings of the proto-mind. It suggests a constant or 
recurring feedback relationship between the internal and external repre-
sentations of bifaces. In addition to matching mental representations with 
the received visual and tactile representations of the bifaces they were mak-
ing, individuals must have received the visual representations of bifaces 
made by others, especially in their immediate social setting. The feedback 
process reinforced individual or local trends that perhaps had begun as 
random variations, a sort of mental “founder’s effect.”
While the production of bifaces as a whole may have followed a random 
walk pattern, this apparently was not the case among individuals and/
or local groups. Just as Oldowan people spent a million years tinkering 
with various forms of chipped stone and eventually matched internal and 
external representations of the ovate biface, Acheulean individuals and/or 
small groups toyed with the biface form (or “talked to themselves” in this 
way) for roughly the same length of time. There may have been other exter-
nalized representations not preserved in the archaeological record with 
which they developed a feedback relationship. I have suggested that the 
matching of internal and external representations by the Oldowan tool-
makers underlies the emergence of the proto-mind; similarly, the feedback 
between internal and external biface representations may have contributed 
at least in part to the emergence of the modern mind.
The third major observation about the proto-mind is that, like the mod-
ern mind, it was a collective enterprise. The biface makers shared mental 
representations among individual brains, a phenomenon that had evolved 
in the honeybees but probably not among earlier vertebrates. In compari-
son with the iconic dancing of the honeybee, laden with vital economic 
information, the making of bifaces seems rather silly. But perhaps the chief 
importance of the bifaces was that they constituted shared structure—in 

Figure 2.12  Variation in bifaces appears to be continuous and without clear division into 
subtypes, as observed by Glynn Isaac on the basis of his analysis of stone artifacts from 
Olorgesaile (Kenya). (From Glynn Ll. Isaac, Olorgesailie: Archeological Studies of a Middle 
Pleistocene Lake Basin in Kenya [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1977], 123, fig. 40. 
Reprinted with the permission of Barbara Isaac)

70         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
this case, “talking to one another”—regardless of content or meaning. This 
may have had a cohesive effect on social groups. In any case, the archaeo-
logical record shows that the biface representations were communicated 
through time as well as space, from one generation to the next, and that 
the collective Acheulean brain transcended individual organisms in a way 
that the shared representations of the honeybee do not.
A collective brain is a logical, if not inevitable, result of the evolution 
of the ability to externalize mental representations in a social setting. In 
addition to their effect on group cohesion, the bifaces also probably reflect 
a more dynamic cognitive environment. Even if the representations com-
municated back and forth within and between social groups were devoid 
of meaningful content, the simple fact of their existence—of the flow of 
mental representations among a group of individuals—seems significant. I 
would guess that it was critical to the subsequent emergence of the super-
brain and modern mind.
Either the biface makers or the habit of biface making spread from 
Africa into the Near East roughly 1.4 million years ago. Acheulean bifaces 
occur at sites of this age in the Jordan Valley at ‘Ubeidiya (Israel).118 They 
did not spread beyond the Near East into other parts of Eurasia at this 
time, however. Homo populations in East Asia and the earliest known 
occupants of Europe did not make bifaces. As far as we know, there were 
no significant changes in human anatomy or ecology at this time.
After a million years ago, some changes are apparent in Africa that seem 
to have set the stage for the evolution of modern humans and the modern 
mind. The volume of the brain significantly increased, and a larger-brained 
form of Homo is recognized in the African fossil record by about 800,000 
years ago. Often referred to as Homo heidelbergensis, reflecting the discovery 
in 1907 of a fossil jaw in Germany that appears to belong to the same spe-
cies,119 its estimated brain volume is between about 1,100 and 1,400 cubic 
centimeters and overlaps substantially with that of modern humans. Homo 
heidelbergensis retained primitive features of the skull, including a forwardly 
projecting face, thick supraorbital torus (brow ridge), and receding frontal 
bone (sloping forehead) (figure 2.13). Some paleoanthropologists never-
theless prefer to classify it as an archaic form of Homo sapiens.120
Coincident with and probably related to the changes in anatomy are 
changes in artifacts. Acheulean assemblages containing a high proportion 
of cleavers made on large flakes appear in East Africa after a million years 
ago (for example, at Olorgesailie [Kenya]), and similar assemblages in the 

daydreams of the lower paleolithic        71
Figure 2.13  Crania often assigned to the later biface maker Homo heidelbergensis reflect a 
significant increase in brain volume (within the lower range of that of modern humans 
[mean = ~1,400 ml]): (A) Kabwe (Zambia) and (B) Petralona (Greece). (Redrawn from G. 
Philip Rightmire, “Homo in the Middle Pleistocene: Hypodigms, Variation, and Species 
Recognition,” Evolutionary Anthropology 17 [2008]: 10, fig. 1)
Near East are dated to after 800,000 years ago (for example, at Gesher 
Benot Ya’aqov [Israel]).121 Both human fossils assigned to Homo heidelber-
gensis and biface assemblages (often containing many cleavers) are found 
in Europe by 640,000 years ago and document the spread of the larger-
brained Homo into higher latitudes (as far as 52o North in Britain).122 The 
new biface makers also moved eastward into the Indian subcontinent, 
where they seem to be represented by both Acheulean artifacts and a par-
tial cranium (Narmada) (figure 2.14).123
The workings of the proto-mind are very much in evidence during 
this great dispersal event and provide a sharp contrast to the subsequent 
migration, also out of Africa, of modern humans. There is evidence for 

72         daydreams of the lower paleolithic
regional variation in the late Acheulean, and many bifaces are shaped 
with greater refinement and precision than those of the early Acheu-
lean.124 But the lack of creativity is manifest in an essentially uniform pat-
tern of stone-artifact production, especially the bifaces. There is nothing 
comparable to the spatial and temporal differentiation of material cul-
ture that took place after 60,000 years ago when modern humans spread 
throughout the Old World.
Figure 2.14  Although early biface makers occupied the Near East 1.4 million years ago, 
the major dispersal of biface-making humans (Homo heidelbergensis) out of Africa took 
place roughly 750,000 years ago, when they moved into the Near East, western and south-
ern Europe, and southern Asia.

3
Modern Humans and the Super-Brain
For by Art is created that great Leviathan called a Common-wealth 
. . . which is but an Artificiall Man.
Thomas Hobbes
Archaeological evidence of the modern mind (or modernity) 
emerged in Africa after 100,000 years ago. It is associated with anatomi-
cally modern humans (Homo sapiens). At first, the signs of modernity seem 
rather modest; they are confined to perforated-shell ornaments, polished 
bone awls and points, and simple geometric designs incised into lumps 
of red ocher.1 But roughly 60,000 years ago, some of these anatomically 
and behaviorally modern humans spread out of Africa and into other 
parts of the Old World, including Australia. In a relatively short period of 
time, the geographic area of the modern human archaeological record was 
expanded greatly, and at least some parts of this vast domain yield spec-
tacular traces of modernity in the form of sculpture, painting, and musical 
instruments dating to more than 30,000 years ago.2
The archaeological record offers other items and patterns widely 
deemed to be evidence of modern behavior. The polished bone awls and 
points found in Africa before the dispersal of Homo sapiens into Eurasia 
are only the beginning of an impressive expansion in the variety and com-
plexity of technologies. By 30,000 years ago, the presence of tailored sewn 
clothing, hand-operated rotary drills, high-temperature kilns, devices for 
harvesting small mammals, and other innovations are documented or reli-
ably inferred from one or more regions occupied by modern humans.3 

74         modern humans and the super-brain
Other indications of modernity are said to include the production of 
stone blades (as opposed to flakes), the appearance of more standardized 
artifact types, the organization of domestic space, and the construction of 
complex hearths.4
A few years ago, the South African archaeologist Lyn Wadley, frus-
trated with the empirical “shopping list” approach to defining moder-
nity in the archaeological record, suggested something different. Wadley 
argued that modernity should be defined with reference to a coherent 
theoretical framework. There is a widespread view that the use of sym-
bols or “symbolically organized behavior” represents the fundamental 
difference between modern humans and their predecessors. Spoken lan-
guage is the predominant mode of symbolic expression, but it seems 
to have no visibility in the archaeological record. Wadley therefore sug-
gested that the “storage” of symbols in material form, such as visual art 
and stylistic attributes of artifacts, is the best way to identify modernity 
in archaeological terms.5
The use of external symbols is only part of what distinguishes the mod-
ern mind from the proto-mind, however. As noted in chapter 1, the linguist 
Noam Chomsky concluded that creativity (he used the more prosaic term 
“discrete infinity”), not the use of symbols, is the “core property” of lan-
guage and that, following the evolutionary psychologist Michael Corballis, 
the same property can be extended to all forms of artificial or semantic 
mental representation. Creativity—the ability to recombine the elements 
of mental representations in hierarchical form, yielding potentially infi-
nite variations of structure—is a unique and essential characteristic of the 
modern mind. It is the capacity to generate alternative reality.6 While the 
use of external symbols is an important realm of creative expression, it is 
only part of a larger phenomenon. By excluding the nonsymbolic media 
through which the creativity of the mind is expressed, much of modernity 
is lost.
The most consequential nonsymbolic realm of creative expression is 
technology. After roughly 100,000 years ago, if not earlier, the technol-
ogy of modern humans exhibits the same unlimited creativity recognized 
in language: a potentially infinite range of variation in hierarchical form 
with embedded components. From a relatively simple technological base 
comprising scrapers, bifaces, and other items of flaked stone; composite 
tools and weapons; and some shaped wooden artifacts, modern humans 
created an increasingly diverse and complex array of implements and 
devices. The growth of technology was cumulative. At 75,000 years ago, 

modern humans and the super-brain        75
humans were shaping points and awls of bone. By 25,000 years ago, they 
had invented cold storage and fired ceramics. By 17,000 years ago, they 
were making simple mechanical devices, baking bread, and domesticat-
ing dogs.
Technology is not the only nonsymbolic avenue of creative expression 
among modern humans. Although it may have little impact on popula-
tion and ecology (Steven Pinker described it as “useless” from an evolu-
tionary biology perspective), music is another major realm of potentially 
infinite and often complex variation in structure.7 Claude Lévi-Strauss, 
who labeled it “the supreme mystery” of humankind, observed that music 
possesses its own unique character that sets it apart from language and 
art as well as technology.8 While symbolic, iconic, and especially stylistic 
elements may be incorporated into compositions, music is fundamentally 
not symbolic. In my view, it is an important part of the modern mind and 
should not be excluded from the archaeological definition of modernity. 
And it exhibits a surprisingly high visibility in the archaeological record 
after 40,000 years ago.9
There are other channels of creativity among modern humans, but their 
visibility in the archaeological record is either extremely low or ambiguous. 
Dance and cuisine are difficult to discern in the early prehistoric record, 
while the structuring of social roles—which acquires enormous significance 
in later times—is only tentatively identified in a Paleolithic context. These 
areas of creativity cannot be included in the archaeological definition of 
modernity at present, but they are part of the larger frame of reference and 
remind us that the offspring of the mind take many forms, not a few of 
which are nonsymbolic.
I suggest that the true significance of symbols, which appear in the 
archaeological record roughly 75,000 years ago, is that they probably 
indicate the formation of the super-brain (figure 3.1). The concept of the 
super-brain is analogous to that of the super-organism: multiple individu-
als perform functions normally confined to a single organism. In the case 
of a collective brain, multiple individuals gather and organize informa-
tion about the environment. Information is shared by one individual 
with others, and some of it is stored and passed on from one generation 
to the next. Honeybee colonies represent a super-organism that contains 
a super-brain, and honeybees also gather, share, and process information 
about their environment among their members. The human super-brain 
embraces a vastly more complex and varied array of information, how-
ever, and it must have conferred significant advantages on its owners. 

76         modern humans and the super-brain
Language is the primary means of integration of the human super-
brain, although there are other means such as visual art. The representa-
tions of language are composed of symbols, and while the existence of 
symbols is as old as the metazoan brain, their presence outside the brain 
is extremely rare. A large-brained African Homo had evolved a means to 
externalize mental representations not in simple iconic form, but in true 
symbolic form (that is, information coded by arbitrary referents) as it exists 
in the brain; moreover, the structure of these representations was not con-
strained by materials such as wood or stone, like earlier forms of exter-
nal thought. And although the archaeological evidence is confined to the 
rather clumsy and inefficient form of externalizing symbols with the hand, 
there is a widespread belief among paleoanthropologists that it is a proxy 
for spoken language—that the vocal tract had finally acquired a function 
analogous to that of the hand as a means to project mental representations 
outside the brain.10
In the early 1990s, Chomsky and his colleagues began to explore the 
idea that while language is poorly designed as a communication system, it 
may be optimally designed to interact with “the systems that are internal to 
the mind.” The seeming imperfections of language (for example, the need-
less redundancy of noun and verb agreement) might be explained better 
from such a perspective11 This notion (dubbed “The Minimalist Program”) 
is compatible with the suggestion that language, as well as other forms of 
Figure 3.1  Simple geometric designs engraved on pieces of red ocher from Blombos Cave 
(South Africa), dating to roughly 75,000 years ago, are the oldest known examples of 
external thoughts in symbolic form (although perforated shell ornaments, which also 
may carry symbolic meaning, are known from even older contexts). (Drawn from a pho-
tograph by Ian T. Hoffecker)

modern humans and the super-brain        77
symbolic expression, represents thought moving from one brain to oth-
ers in a manner analogous to information moving from one part of the 
neocortex to another. When humans share thoughts with one another, 
they are replicating the internal activity of the individual brain (which is a 
major portion of brain activity) on a larger scale.
Equally important, the archaeological evidence for creativity coincides 
at least broadly with the evidence for symbolism, which suggests that the 
super-brain was a prerequisite and a threshold for the generative mental 
powers of behaviorally modern humans. It is only with the appearance of 
symbols in the archaeological record that humans seem to take off—at first 
rather slowly—as a potentially unlimited creative force. The apparent link-
age of the two produces a seeming dilemma, however. Spoken language, so 
widely inferred from the presence of symbols rendered by hand, is itself a 
primary manifestation of potentially unlimited creative ability. How could 
it also have been a prerequisite for the super-brain?
The super-brain may be the key to explaining other unique and funda-
mental aspects of human cognition, as discussed in chapter 1. These, in 
turn, seem likely to be related to language and symbolism. Higher-order 
consciousness and a “sense of self” are arguably tied to the use of symbols 
and the ability to create mental representations, in a variety of media, that 
contain oneself, as well as representations that contain oneself in other 
times and places. Such artificial representations are possible only with sym-
bols. And from this, recognition of an “unconscious” self seems to follow. 
All these aspects of psychology, it seems to me, are plausibly linked to the 
phenomenon of the super-brain.
The mind is the super-brain: the integration of brains facilitated by lan-
guage and other forms of symbolism created the mind. Although the super-
brain is composed of a group of individual brains that are the product of 
evolutionary biology, it exhibits properties that are unknown or had not 
been evident in organic evolution. These properties apparently emerged as 
a consequence of the formation of a system of unprecedented complexity 
on Earth (and perhaps elsewhere in the universe). The core property is 
the generation of a potentially infinite variety of hierarchically organized 
structures of information in various media, analogous to the generation 
of potentially unlimited gene combinations through sexual reproduction. 
The super-brain / mind transcends biological space and time, accumulat-
ing and organizing information over the course of countless generations 
of organisms.

78         modern humans and the super-brain
Emergence
[P]arts of the brain (indeed, the major portion of its tissues) receive 
input only from other parts of the brain, and they give outputs to 
other parts without intervention from the outside world. The brain 
might be said to be in touch more with itself than with anything else.
Gerald M. Edelman
The emergence of the mind is the central issue in paleoanthropology. 
Archaeologists have framed the problem more narrowly, in terms of 
behavioral modernity, defined in the archaeological record as evidence 
for symbolism. Most of them seem to feel that language, represented in 
proxy form by the symbolic content of artifacts and features, is the cen-
terpiece of modernity. I have defined the issue more broadly, in terms of 
not only the super-brain, which is identified with the same archaeologi-
cal evidence for symbolism, but also creativity, which is documented with 
a different sort of archaeological evidence in a wider temporal and spatial 
context. However defined, it seems to me that the issue is fundamentally 
the same.
If the origin of the mind is the central issue in paleoanthropology, it is 
also the most challenging—a seemingly intractable problem. No one seems 
to know how and why the mind developed, or (defined more narrowly) 
how modernity and symbolism may be explained. Speculation about the 
origin of language became so rampant after the publication of On the Ori-
gin of Species that the French Academy of Linguistics famously refused to 
publish papers on the subject in 1866. A century and a half later, incred-
ibly little progress has been made. Genetic mutations in speech function 
and working memory have been proposed as a (random) trigger for moder-
nity,12 although we are still left wondering how and why the context for 
such mutations could have evolved.
The eruption of Mount Toba on Sumatra roughly 75,000 years ago 
may have been an environmental factor. The massive volcanic eruption 
generated an ash plume that apparently encircled the globe, reducing tem-
peratures by several degrees and devastating plant and animal life in many 
regions. A few years ago, Stanley Ambrose suggested that the consequences 
of the Mount Toba eruption may have forced the African Homo popu-
lation through a severe evolutionary bottleneck, creating circumstances 
under which rapid genetic change could take place as a result of drift, 
founder’s effect, or local adaptations.13

modern humans and the super-brain        79
Yet another variable may have been competitive interactions between 
anatomically modern humans (Homo sapiens) and their Neanderthal cousins 
(Homo neanderthalensis). The dispersal of Homo heidelbergensis into western 
Eurasia after 1 million years ago eventually yielded a northern large-brained 
form of Homo that exhibited many of the same behavioral traits as its Afri-
can contemporaries between 300,000 and 100,000 years ago. The Neander-
thals seem to have expanded into the Near East at certain times (probably 
during intervals of cold climate), while modern humans were at least briefly 
present in the same region about 100,000 years ago. Thus the geographic 
distribution of the two species may have converged at times, leading to com-
petition between two closely related and highly intelligent species of human 
with potential evolutionary consequences for each of them.14
Despite the absence of a compelling explanation for the origin of lan-
guage and the mind, much is known about the developments in anatomy 
and behavior (some of which is manifest by preserved external thoughts) 
that preceded the appearance of symbolism and creativity in the archae-
ological record. These developments include a significant expansion of 
brain size, especially pronounced in certain areas of the brain (reflected in 
the size and shape of fossil crania). They may include changes in the vocal 
tract related to speech, but these may have occurred earlier. The changes in 
anatomical structure were accompanied by the ability to externalize repre-
sentations of greater variety and complexity (that is, comprising more hier-
archical levels). All these developments seem relevant to the subsequent 
arrival of symbolism and creativity.
Two general observations of a theoretical character are worth making at 
this point. One is that if the principles that govern creativity are emergent 
properties of the brain—a system of unprecedented complexity—this critical 
aspect of modernity may have been a consequence of developing complexity, 
rather than an adaptive trait that evolved because selection favored a more 
creative human organism. The second, and closely related, observation has 
been made by many students of human evolution. It is that at least some 
aspects of modernity or the modern mind may have evolved in another 
context, as features or systems designed for other functions, and only later 
reconfigured for functions associated with modernity. This phenomenon 
does not seem uncommon in evolutionary biology, and a frequently cited 
example is the reconfiguration of feathers among birds—thought to have 
evolved for thermoregulation—as part of their flight adaptation.15
A puzzling aspect of the paleoanthropological record is the seeming 
disconnect between the changes in anatomy and those in behavior that 

80         modern humans and the super-brain
are associated with modernity. In terms of anatomy, modern humans are 
present in Africa by 200,000 years ago at the latest. But the archaeological 
evidence for symbolism so widely viewed as the sine qua non of modern 
behavior does not appear until about 80,000 to 75,000 years ago. In a 
recent essay, the paleoanthropologist Ian Tattersall observed that “in evolu-
tionary terms this disconnect was entirely routine, for every new behavior 
has to be permitted by a structure that already exists.”16 And perhaps the 
gap is more apparent than real. There may have been critical anatomical 
changes in the brain that are simply not visible in the fossil skeletal record, 
while earlier archaeological evidence of symbolism and other aspects of 
modernity probably remain to be discovered.
The Information Animal
Instead of asking the standard functionalist question: is [language] 
well designed for use? we ask another question: is it well designed for 
interaction with the systems that are internal to the mind?
Noam Chomsky
Anatomically modern humans evolved from a large-brained form of Homo 
in Africa roughly 250,000 years ago. This Homo is often assigned to the 
taxon Homo heidelbergensis. It expanded into Eurasia after 1 million years 
ago, establishing a separate northern lineage. The African lineage evolved, 
gradually it seems, into anatomically modern humans (Homo sapiens), who 
were present in sub-Saharan Africa no later than 200,000 years ago. The 
northern or Eurasian lineage evolved into the Neanderthals (Homo nean-
derthalensis) during the same time period. Homo heidelbergensis also may 
have had a shadowy presence in East Asia.17
The most important anatomical changes related to the emergence of 
modernity are alterations in the size and shape of the brain, and evolution 
of the modern vocal tract. The increase in brain volume is presumably 
important to the expansion of cognitive abilities (that is, the growing com-
plexity and variety of the externalized mental representations observed in 
the archaeological record), while the change in the vocal tract is logically 
connected to spoken language and the use of symbols (that is, making 
artifacts with the larynx). Both carry evolutionary “costs” and require an 
explanation as to how their benefits outweighed their disadvantages in 
terms of natural selection. Large brains are expensive and place added 
demands on their bearers with respect to energy and nutritional needs. 

modern humans and the super-brain        81
And the configuration of the modern human vocal tract exposes its own-
ers to a significant risk of choking.18
Contemporary theories of the mind seem to be based on the assump-
tion that the size and complexity of the brain—the staggering number of 
neurons and synaptic connections—are essential to its function.19 It makes 
sense, therefore, that archaeological evidence of fully modern behavior 
should be preceded by substantial growth in cranial volume. But volume 
among living and recent humans varies greatly, and there are many exam-
ples of individuals with normal or above-normal intellectual abilities who 
have small cranial capacity (as low as 1,000 to 1,100 cubic centimeters).20
Between 500,000 and 200,000 years ago, cranial volume increased sig-
nificantly among both the sub-Saharan and the north Eurasian humans, 
which complicates the question of why larger brains evolved. Why did 
the Neanderthals develop an oversized cranium similar to that of modern 
humans during the same period of time? Although both species exhibit 
signs of an expansion in the complexity and variety of external representa-
tion, only modern humans seem to have made the final leap to external 
symbols, super-brain, and unlimited creativity. This suggests that large 
brain volume is a necessary but not a sufficient basis for the modern mind 
and that after a threshold size is achieved, a triggering event that may have 
little or no visibility in the fossil record also is necessary for the final leap 
(for example, a genetic mutation that occurred in modern humans but 
not in Neanderthals).21 The parallel evolution of brain size also may have 
been driven by different factors in each species, although it seems an odd 
coincidence that cranial volume should reach roughly the same level at the 
same time in both species.
African skulls often assigned to Homo heidelbergensis date to between 
600,000 and 300,000 years ago and include specimens from Bodo (Ethio-
pia); Kabwe, formerly Broken Hill (Zambia); and Ndutu (Tanzania).22 They 
possess a cranial volume of between approximately 1,100 and 1,300 cubic 
centimeters, which represents a significant increase over earlier African 
Homo, but falls short of the brain volume of modern humans (typically 
more than 1,350 cubic centimeters). By 200,000 to 150,000 years ago, 
anatomically modern crania are present in sub-Saharan Africa, including 
at Omo Kibish and Herto (both Ethiopia) (figure 3.2).23
In Europe, Homo heidelbergensis is perhaps represented best by the com-
plete cranium from Petralona (Greece), which is very similar to the Kabwe 
skull but with a slightly lower volume of 1,230 cubic centimeters.24 Even 
the earliest European specimens assigned to this taxon exhibit features that 

82         modern humans and the super-brain
suggest a diverging northern lineage that eventually produced the highly 
distinctive Neanderthals. Mandibles from the Sima de los Huesos (Atapu-
erca) in northern Spain (probably more than 500,000 years old) exhibit a 
pronounced gap between the third molar and the ramus (retromolar space), 
which is a classic Neanderthal feature. The expansion of brain volume also 
is evident in this sample; one of the crania possesses an impressive volume 
of 1,390 cubic centimeters. The European Neanderthals later evolved a 
mean volume of slightly over 1,500 cubic centimeters, which was compa-
rable to that of anatomically modern humans in Africa at the time and 
somewhat higher than the mean for living humans.
Figure 3.2  Anatomically modern humans had evolved in sub-Saharan Africa by roughly 
200,000 years ago. (Map courtesy of the University of Texas Libraries, The University of 
Texas at Austin)

modern humans and the super-brain        83
Cold climate may account for at least some of the increased size of the 
Neanderthal cranium. Many aspects of Neanderthal anatomy conform to 
a general pattern of cold adaptation among warm-blooded animals, includ-
ing the comparatively short forelimbs and thick chest (reducing heat loss 
and protecting against frostbite).25 Among modern humans, the largest 
cranial volume is found in populations that have occupied the circum-
polar zone for several thousand years or more.26 These populations also 
exhibit some of the other features found among the Neanderthals that 
are attributed to cold-climate adaptation. And, significantly with reference 
to brain size, these features often appear to have developed to an extreme 
degree in the Neanderthals (who have been described as “hyperpolar”), 
possibly reflecting their relative lack of technological protection against 
low temperatures.27
None of the increase in brain size in African Homo sapiens can be 
accounted for by climate, however, and an explanation must be sought 
in the increased cognitive demands of society, foraging, and/or technol-
ogy. A hypothesis proposed by Robin Dunbar is that the modern human 
brain expanded in response to widening social networks. When these net-
works grew beyond the residential foraging group and became too large 
to maintain by grooming—an instrument of social bonding among higher 
primates—Dunbar suggests language evolved as a substitute for maintain-
ing social ties (“vocal grooming”).28 An earlier and related idea (labeled the 
Machiavellian Intelligence hypothesis) is that large primate brains reflect 
the computational requirements of negotiating complex social systems.29
The “social brain hypothesis,” which rests primarily on the observed 
quantitative relationship between the size of the neocortex and that of 
the social group among primates, seems plausible. But the archaeological 
evidence that accompanies the expansion of brain size (which includes 
both modern humans and Neanderthals) indicates significantly enhanced 
cognitive abilities related to the design of artifacts. The artifacts include 
more-complex hierarchically organized cores, composite tools and weap-
ons with as many as four components, and more creative design variations 
in the shapes of stone implements. Occasional glimpses of less archaeo-
logically visible materials suggest that these abilities were applied in other 
contexts; for example, preserved wooden spears from Germany reflect a 
surprisingly complex sequence of design steps.30 I suggest that at least some 
of the growth in Homo brain size roughly 500,000 years ago is tied to the 
expanded multimodal processing, organizing, storing, and manipulating 
of information implied by these archaeological data.

84         modern humans and the super-brain
And it would appear that the Homo brain was undergoing a general 
expansion of storage space that allows for one of the most striking attri-
butes of living humans—the immense storehouse of memories and knowl-
edge that each individual carries. This information certainly includes a 
large quantity of social data—details about the people with whom we regu-
larly or periodically interact—but also comprises a vast amount of environ-
mental data. One of the salient characteristics of recent hunter-gatherers is 
the large quantity of structured information about the landscape that each 
adult stores in his or her brain. It includes comprehensive and detailed 
classification systems of plants and animals, which is especially impressive 
in tropical settings, where the diversity of biota is very high.31 The collec-
tion and storage of information is part of the environmental adaptation of 
all higher animals, but humans seem to have worked themselves into an 
ecological niche in which it became central.
More than any other organism that has ever trod the Earth, modern 
humans are the product of information, rather than genes (or, because 
genes are themselves a form of information, an alternative and more 
mutable type of information). To an unparalleled degree, an individual 
is the sum of an immense mass of integrated memories and knowledge 
accumulated over a lifetime of experience.32 The quantity of informa-
tion required to function as an adult is so great that roughly 25 percent 
of a human lifetime must be devoted to learning as a child and young 
adult, an excessive period of offspring dependence analogous to the gro-
tesquely oversized cranium. All this information, much of it in the form 
of complex visual representations, requires literally billions of neurons 
organized into groups and networks. To accommodate it in such a large 
quantity, brain volume in African Homo expanded significantly after 
1 million years ago (although the reason why it increased at this time is 
not clear), providing the basis for a novel form of organism, which—like 
the technology it was beginning to create—was largely constructed from 
nongenetic information.33
The African Homo brain also evolved a somewhat different shape dur-
ing this period, and the altered proportions of various regions of the brain 
have been regarded as significant. Although the pronounced verticality 
of the modern human frontal bone suggests an expansion of the frontal 
lobes, comparative analysis of extant hominoids reveals that human frontal 
lobes remain proportionally the same as in the living apes. Within the 
frontal lobes, however, there is some percentage increase (6 percent) of 
the prefrontal cortex, which is almost certainly important.34 Brain-imaging 

modern humans and the super-brain        85
research points to the prefrontal cortex (interconnected with most other 
regions of the brain) as the center of creativity, or the ability to generate 
artificial representations (figure 3.3).35 The most pronounced expansion 
in the modern human brain is seen in the temporal lobe, which is involved 
in language function.36
The evolution of the vocal tract, the other major anatomical change 
linked to modernity, presents a special challenge. The earliest humans 
presumably possessed a vocal tract similar to that of their immediate ape 
ancestors. Over the next few million years, it evolved into the vocal tract 
found in living humans. As in most mammals, the larynx (voice box) is 
positioned relatively high in the neck in the African apes, at the same level 
as the first three cervical vertebrae. In this location, it can shift position to 
separate the passageway to the lungs (windpipe, or trachea) from the tube 
to the stomach (esophagus). In living humans, the larynx migrates down-
ward during infancy to a location opposite the fourth to seventh cervical 
Figure 3.3  A critically important evolutionary change in modern human brain anatomy 
may have been the expansion of the prefrontal cortex, which appears—on the basis of 
recent neuro-imaging studies (PET scans)—to be the primary locus of generativity: (A) 
the prefrontal cortex is active when a subject is presented with a novel task; (B) activity 
declines when the task is a familiar one; (C) the prefrontal cortex becomes active again 
when a different task is introduced. (Redrawn from Elkhonon Goldberg, The New Execu-
tive Brain: Frontal Lobes in a Complex World [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009], 90, 
fig. 7.1, adapted from Marcus E. Raichle et al., “Practice-related Changes in Human Brain 
Functional Anatomy During Nonmotor Learning,” Cerebral Cortex 4 [1994]: 8–26)

86         modern humans and the super-brain
vertebrae, where it cannot separate the windpipe from the esophagus (fig-
ure 3.4).37 This creates the choking risk mentioned earlier, which accounts 
for several thousand deaths each year, but expands the size of the vocal 
chamber or pharynx. Using the vocal folds of the larynx, living humans can 
generate a wide range of sounds in this enlarged vocal chamber.
The morphology of the vocal tract also may be tied to other aspects of 
human evolution. The larynx functions to close off the windpipe during 
swallowing and lifting heavy objects; this retains air and helps solidify the 
trunk as a steady frame for the more demanding arm movements. There 
are some parallels between humans and gibbons (lesser apes) with respect 
to larynx function, and this may be significant not only because gibbons 
exhibit some complex vocalizations, but also because they depend on pow-
erful arm movements to swing through the tree canopy.38 Most gibbons 
actually walk bipedally about 6 to 7 percent of the time, which seems to 
reflect their highly specialized forelimb functions.39 The pattern suggests a 
possible link between human bipedalism and carrying objects, on the one 
hand, and the lower position of the larynx, on the other.
Figure 3.4  Unlike that of the hand, reconstruction of the vocal tract in fossil forms of 
Homo has been a major challenge in paleoanthropology, due primarily to the dearth of 
preservable skeletal parts associated with this organ.

modern humans and the super-brain        87
Although many paleoanthropologists believe that language is closely 
linked to the evolution of the anatomically modern larynx, the relation-
ship between them is somewhat ambiguous. A syntactic language is theo-
retically possible without a modern human vocal tract (or, for that matter, 
without any vocal tract [for example, sign language]). And while chimpan-
zees cannot produce the full range of speech sounds of which modern 
humans are capable (although some nonprimates, such as parrots, can imi-
tate human voices with remarkable precision), no one language employs 
the full range of possible sounds and a syntactic language based on a much 
smaller range of sounds is conceivable.40
It is important not to lose sight of the extraordinary nature of human 
language.41 In the context of evolutionary biology, it is a bizarre trait. Its 
closest parallel is the iconic honeybee dance, and it has no analogues 
among living vertebrates. Language often is studied as a vocal communica-
tion system that is found among many birds and mammals, but this recalls 
the study of Acheulean bifaces as stone tools. Just as the bifaces provide 
insights into the proto-mind of the Lower Paleolithic, language offers a key 
to the workings of the super-brain and the modern mind.42
The human vocal tract has an analogue in the hand. Like the hand, the 
vocal tract is a highly precise instrument that is capable of projecting very 
complex structures of thought outside the brain, using a range of sounds 
rather than a repertoire of movements. Through the conventions of syntactic 
language, the structures are in coded sequences composed of the sounds and 
entirely in digital and symbolic form, like the genetic code.43 The range of 
sounds that may be generated by the modern human vocal tract is such that 
only a subset is needed to provide the digital elements of any given language.
But tracking the evolution of the vocal tract in the fossil record is much 
more difficult than reconstructing the changes in the morphology and 
function of the human hand. The key elements of the vocal tract are com-
posed of soft parts or cartilage, and thus they do not preserve in the fossil 
record. Various researchers have attempted to reconstruct the vocal tract 
morphology of premodern humans on the basis of related skeletal parts 
that have been preserved. The degree of flexure at the base of the cranium 
was one suggested indication of a lowered position of the larynx, but the 
relationship between the two has been questioned. Other proposed clues 
have included the length of the neck and the size of the hypoglossal canal, 
but these also have proved problematic.44
At this point, there seems to be consensus that the modern human 
vocal tract had evolved by the time anatomically modern humans were 

88         modern humans and the super-brain
present in Africa (that is, more than 100,000 years ago). And despite ear-
lier efforts to demonstrate that the Neanderthals did not possess a modern 
vocal tract, it now appears that their vocal tract may have been similar to 
that of modern humans.45 (Ongoing reconstruction of the Neanderthal 
genome reports the presence of FOXP2, a gene related to speech function 
and previously thought to be unique to modern humans.)46 All this may 
indicate that anatomical speech capabilities antedate any archaeological 
evidence for behavioral modernity and, by implication, language.
The Levallois School of Language
The origin of language . . . seems to have been closely linked with 
technical motor function. Indeed the link is so close that employ-
ing as they do the same pathways in the brain, the two . . . could be 
attributed to one and same phenomenon.
André Leroi-Gourhan
It is the archaeological record—with all its gaps and biases—that offers the 
trail of evidence for the evolution of the super-brain and the emergence 
of the modern mind. The broad pattern is this: roughly 300,000 years 
ago, some changes in the making of stone tools become apparent. They 
concern the way in which stone cores are prepared for the removal of 
flakes and seem to be tied to the production of composite implements 
(that is, weapons and tools composed of several parts). Both prepared-core, 
or Levallois, techniques and composite implements reflect an increase in 
the number of hierarchical levels and embedded components employed 
in creating artifacts.47 And these changes seem to be tied to some other 
potentially significant developments, including the appearance of regional 
variations in the design of stone points.
If the changes seem less than dramatic, they nevertheless provide a logical 
prelude to the development of syntactic language, with its complex hierar-
chical structure and possibility for infinite creation. The premise is that the 
cognitive capabilities manifest in making more-complex hierarchically orga-
nized artifacts were eventually expressed in other media. The core property 
of modernity—potentially infinite combinatorial creativity—was expressed by 
making sentences and artifacts in the same way.48 And if language itself is 
not the core property, its advent marks the threshold of modernity. Not only 
does it represent the primary medium by which modern humans rearrange 
the world around them, but it is the basis of the super-brain.

modern humans and the super-brain        89
The process by which this threshold was attained remains unclear, how-
ever. As with the expansion in brain size, no one seems to know what trig-
gered the changes in stone technology 300,000 years ago, even though—in 
contrast to the large bifaces of the Lower Paleolithic—the practical benefits 
of the new technology are readily apparent. It is not clear if the process 
of development toward more complex forms took place gradually or in 
stages initiated by rapid bursts of change, or a combination of both. While 
prepared-core techniques exhibit progressive development over time, other 
changes appear abruptly.
It strikes me as plausible, if not likely, that feedback between individual 
brains and the increasingly complex artifacts, the externalized mental rep-
resentations, played an important role in the process,49 as did dynamic 
interactions among the brains within each social network. In chapter 2, I 
suggested that a similar process of feedback was critical to the development 
of the first externalized mental representations, in the form of bifaces. The 
role of speech, “artifacts” fashioned by the vocal tract in its presymbolic 
mode, may have been equally important but difficult to assess because of 
the uncertainties surrounding the evolution of the vocal tract.50
In its developed form, prepared- or Levallois-core technology is a set of 
procedures for generating flakes or blades of specific size and shape from 
large pieces of stone. Prepared-core techniques allow the toolmaker tighter 
control over the form of stone blanks struck off the core, and hence their 
logical connection to the production of composite implements, which 
require blanks of predetermined size and shape that can be inserted into 
wooden handles and shafts. Several steps are involved. First, the toolmaker 
must acquire a piece of stone of sufficient size and quality. Then he or she 
prepares a continuous surface (or series of “striking platforms”), extending 
around the perimeter of the stone, which is normally produced by succes-
sive vertical blows to the upper face. The blows are struck with a “hard 
hammer” (another piece of stone). The upper surface of the core is shaped, 
in turn, by a series of horizontal blows around the perimeter. At this point, 
the toolmaker may choose from a variety of strategies for generating flakes 
or blades from the upper surface.51
The archaeologist Eric Boëda emphasized the hierarchical character of 
prepared-core technology (figure 3.5). Describing the relationship between 
the upper surface of the core and the platform surfaces around the perim-
eter, he noted that “the two surfaces are hierarchically related: one pro-
duces defined and varied blanks that are predetermined, and the other 
is conceived of as a surface of striking platforms for the production of 

Figure 3.5  The dawn of creativity? Nonrandom variations in the reduction sequences 
of prepared-core technology, as reconstructed by Eric Boëda. (From Richard G. Klein, 
The Human Career: Human Biological and Cultural Origins, 3rd ed. [Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2009], 488, fig. 6.33, redrawn from Eric Boëda, “Levallois: A Volumetric 
Construction, Methods, a Technique,” in The Definition and Interpretation of Levallois Tech-
nology, ed. Harold L. Dibble and Ofer Bar-Yosef [Madison, Wis.: Prehistory Press, 1995], 
59, fig. 4.28. Reprinted with the permission of the University of Chicago Press)

modern humans and the super-brain        91
predetermined blanks. In the course of a single production sequence of 
predetermined blanks, the role of the two planes cannot be reversed.”52 
Boëda also pointed to the collective character of prepared-core methods, 
which were shared among members of a group and “transmitted from 
generation to generation.”53 Over great distances of space and time, these 
groups devised nonrandom variations on prepared-core flaking strategies.
The origins of prepared-core technology seem to lie in the production 
of Acheulean bifaces, just as they probably may be traced to the bifacial 
flaking of the Oldowan pebbles. In some places, however, the relationship 
may be an indirect one. In Africa, prepared-core technology is said to have 
evolved from simpler Acheulean flaking techniques beginning around 
500,000 years ago. But the simpler cores often were used to produce pre-
forms for bifaces—that is, large flakes subsequently chipped into bifaces.54 
A fully developed prepared-core technology is present by the African Mid-
dle Stone Age, which began between 300,000 and 200,000 years ago.55
Prepared-core techniques emerged only among the makers of bifaces and 
their descendents, a pattern that is potentially significant. Fully developed 
Levallois cores appeared in western Eurasia more than 200,000 years ago, 
but never outside the Homo heidelbergensis range. Prepared-core technology 
was long believed to have been introduced into Europe rather suddenly, 
perhaps by the arrival of a large-brained Homo population from Africa.56 
Many now think that it developed independently from earlier biface tech-
nology in Europe.57 In any case, the Neanderthals became skilled makers 
of both prepared cores and composite implements.58
The discovery that humans were assembling composite tools and weap-
ons 250,000 years ago represents a major development in Paleolithic 
archaeology. Not one composite artifact has yet been recovered from the 
African Middle Stone Age or the Eurasian Middle Paleolithic, but their 
presence is established beyond a reasonable doubt from multiple converg-
ing lines of evidence. Composite implements are known among recent 
foraging peoples in many parts of the world,59 and specimens have been 
recovered from sites that date to as early as the later Upper Paleolithic.60
In the Middle Stone Age and Middle Paleolithic archaeological record, 
composite tools and weapons can be reconstructed from traces of micro-
scopic wear and adhesives on the stone blades and points that were 
inserted into wooden handles and shafts. In some cases, the microwear 
indicates the use of a binding cord or thong.61 Microscopic traces of adhe-
sives—including resin, bitumen, and ocher—have been found on the stone 
blades and points in both African and Eurasian sites.62 Recent analysis 

92         modern humans and the super-brain
of impact scars on blades from several South African sites indicates that 
they were attached in two different ways: on the end and on the side of a 
wooden shaft.63
The implications for human cognition are considerable, especially if 
the complex prepared-core technology is incorporated into the production 
process as one of several subassembly units (or “techno-units”) that nest 
within a larger hierarchically organized structure.64 The other techno-units 
require shaping and grooving a wooden handle or shaft and preparing 
and applying the binding agent(s). Each component subassembly involves 
obtaining and processing a different type of material. The components are 
brought together in a preconceived design that exhibits at least a few alter-
native forms—for example, stone-tipped spear versus hafted cutting tool or 
side-blade versus end-blade (figure 3.6)—and the parallels with language 
were noted by Stanley Ambrose:
Conjunctive technologies are hierarchical and involve nonrepetitive fine 
hand motor control to fit components to each other. Assembling techno-
units in different configurations produces functionally different tools. 
This is formally analogous to grammatical language, because hierarchi-
cal assemblies of sounds produce meaningful phrases and sentences and 
changing word order changes meaning.65
The structure and variety of Levallois cores and composite implements 
would seem to reflect two significant developments in brain evolution. 
The first is the increase in information-storage capacity—specifically, the 
expansion of the capacity for working memory, which has been defined as 
“task-relevant information” (such as memorizing directions to a particular 
address). New brain-imaging studies (functional magnetic resonance imag-
ing [fMRI]) reveal that working memory is concentrated in the prefrontal 
cortex.66 The second development is increased connectivity, which logi-
cally underlies the generativity manifest in the design variations of cores 
and composite implements. Here, too, recent fMRI analysis points to the 
prefrontal cortex. Both expanded working-memory capacity and increased 
generativity must have been essential to the development of language.67
Moreover, composite implements conferred obvious advantages on the 
people who invested time and materials on their production. If the practi-
cal functions of the Acheulean bifaces remain obscure, stone-tipped spears 
and hafted cutting and scraping tools must have been a major improve-
ment over wooden spears and hand-held flakes in terms of power and 

modern humans and the super-brain        93
efficiency.68 Perhaps other, unpreserved, technologies—also products of 
the emerging ability of humans to create more complex implements—
contributed further to gathering food, defending against predators, and 
other aspects of human ecology. Their impact on long-term reproductive 
fitness may have been the critical evolutionary driver (directional selec-
tion) for more hierarchically organized technologies. And there is at least 
some support for this notion in evidence for changes in diet. In Europe, 
the Neanderthals display an impressive ability to bring down very large 
and undoubtedly dangerous animals, such as mammoth and woolly rhi-
noceros.69 In Africa, there is an eventual broadening of the economy to 
include freshwater fishing and gathering of marine invertebrates.70
A more puzzling development during the period between 300,000 and 
100,000 years ago is the use of mineral pigments. The pigments, which 
include fragments of red ocher (iron oxide) and black manganese dioxide, 
are found in both European and African sites. Some fragments exhibit 
wear facets that suggest application to a hard surface, and a few of them 
Figure 3.6  The production of composite tools and weapons required a sequence of steps 
for each “techno-unit” (representing a different raw material) within a larger hierarchically 
structured assembly and included at least several variants: scraper (left) and spear (right).

94         modern humans and the super-brain
are described as “crayons”—that is, drawing implements.71 Because mineral 
pigments were later used by modern humans to create drawings and paint-
ings, some archaeologists suggest that they reflect a similar pattern among 
Neanderthals and modern humans of the African Middle Stone Age. If so, 
the artworks remain to be discovered.
An alternative explanation is that the pigments were part of the increas-
ingly complex technology of the period. Recent foraging peoples used min-
eral pigment as an adhesive, or mixed it with other substances to produce 
an adhesive, for hafting stone blades or points to wooden shafts.72 Now 
there is evidence that red ocher was used in a similar way during the Afri-
can Middle Stone Age. Microscopic traces of ocher and plant resin were 
found on stone artifacts from Middle Stone Age sites in South Africa, indi-
cating that a mixture of the two was applied to stone pieces to help secure 
them to wooden hafts.73 This reveals yet more complexity in composite-
implement production, adding further steps and another raw material to 
the preparation of the adhesive techno-unit. Lyn Wadley observed that the 
simultaneous appearance of mineral pigment and evidence for hafting in 
the archaeological record might not be a coincidence.74
The growing creative powers of the collective brain are manifest on 
a continental scale in the African Middle Stone Age. There is a pattern 
of marked regional variation in the design of stone artifacts, especially 
small bifacial forms and points, that apparently reflects emerging local 
styles and traditions (figure 3.7). Thus, for example, Middle Stone Age 
sites in North Africa yield distinctive stemmed points, while sites in 
west-central Africa contain equally distinctive narrow elongated bifacial 
points.75 In a subdued way, the African record acquires a modern look 
by 250,000 years ago that is quite unlike the “random walk” pattern of 
the Lower Paleolithic.
Such a pattern of regional variation may be lacking in Europe, although 
some archaeologists have long insisted on the presence of Neanderthal 
“cultures.” The famous French Paleolithic specialist François Bordes 
(1919–1981) proposed no fewer than five “tribes” in southwestern France 
on the basis of varying percentages of different types of Middle Paleolithic 
stone artifacts.76 In the 1960s, Bordes’s view was challenged by the Ameri-
can archaeologist Lewis Binford, who argued that functional differences 
and sampling error could account for the variations in artifact assem-
blages.77 Others have suggested that perceived regional variations in assem-
blage composition elsewhere in Europe represent distinct local cultures. 
Here, too, it is difficult to discount the effects of functional differences 

modern humans and the super-brain        95
and sampling error. Perhaps the sharpest contrast with the African record 
is the absence of clear regional variations in the small bifaces and points.78
The cognitive archaeology of the Neanderthals may offer critical clues 
to the emergence of the modern mind. As already noted, the Neander-
thals had evolved brains of comparable size to those of modern humans 
and may have possessed fully modern speech capabilities (if not syntactic 
language). Independently or not, they developed prepared-core techniques 
and composite implements, as did their counterparts in Africa. Although 
some archaeologists maintain that the Neanderthals continued to progress 
Figure 3.7  Regional variation in the design of small bifaces, points, and other stone imple-
ments in Africa during the Middle Stone Age yields a relatively modern-like pattern of 
cultural variability. (After J. Desmond Clark, “African and Asian Perspectives on the Ori-
gin of Modern Humans,” in The Origin of Modern Humans and the Impact of Chronometric 
Dating, ed. M. J. Aitken, C. B. Stringer, and P. A. Mellars [Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1993], 155, fig. 1. Reproduced with permission from the Royal Society, 1992)

96         modern humans and the super-brain
along the same lines as modern humans and eventually contributed to the 
rise of modernity,79 most argue that they never got beyond the early stages 
of the change that began 300,000 years ago. Some variable or combination 
of variables implicated in the later stages of the formation of the modern 
mind seems to have been missing in northern Eurasia.
If the events that lie behind the emergence of language remain obscure, 
it seems to me that the combination of the archaeological record and exist-
ing knowledge of brain structure and function provide major clues about 
what happened. A basic premise—by no means accepted by everyone—is 
that the making of artifacts and the construction of sentences are fun-
damentally similar or exhibit some of the same properties.80 The devel-
opments in prepared-core technology, composite implement design, and 
artifact style reflect increased combinatorial variation of elements, both 
discrete (digital) and analogical (continuous), on multiple hierarchically 
structured levels. At some point, a threshold was reached: the number of 
elements and levels was sufficient for generating a potentially infinite set 
of different combinations.
As Frederick Coolidge and Thomas Wynn noted, expanded working-
memory capacity, localized in the frontal lobes, must have been a crit-
ical factor in reaching the threshold.81 And presumably the role of the 
expanded prefrontal cortex in creating novel combinations also was criti-
cal. The problem is explaining how the capabilities of these and other neu-
ral structures connected to hand function also became connected to the 
vocal tract. Recent brain-imaging research does not provide an answer, but 
does reveal extensive overlap in areas activated for spoken language and 
symbolic “hand language” (specifically American Sign Language). Using 
PET scans, Karen Emmorey and her colleagues found that the left mesial 
temporal cortex and the left inferior frontal gyrus are “equally involved in 
both speech and sign production.”82
This does not necessarily indicate that gestural language preceded spo-
ken language (although it may have), but the finding strengthens the link 
between the function of the hands and that of the vocal tract for the exter-
nalization of mental representations, specifically those in symbolic mode. 
Based on the comparative functional anatomy and behavior of living pri-
mates, moreover, it is logical to assume that humans in Africa and else-
where 300,000 to 250,000 years ago already relied on an extensive system 
of vocal communication.83 The lower position of the larynx in humans 
relative to its position in other higher primates expanded the potential 
range of vocalized sounds, providing for increased combinatorial possi-

modern humans and the super-brain        97
bilities.84 Viewed from this perspective, the emergence of spoken language 
seems less mysterious.
Documenting language in the archaeological record remains, nev-
ertheless, an exasperating problem. If spoken language, as James Deetz 
observed, is a form of material culture shaped by the larynx rather than by 
the hand, and words and sentences are artifacts composed of sound, they 
are archaeologically invisible. But there are material forms of symbolism 
that survive. Until the development of writing, none of them represents 
language, but it is widely assumed that the making of symbols in material 
form with the hand probably indicates the production of symbols in the 
form of sentences with the larynx.85
While the evidence of increasingly complex, hierarchically organized 
technology in the form of prepared cores and composite implements after 
300,000 years ago is unambiguous and indisputable, the evidence for 
symbolism before 75,000 years ago is highly problematic. The presence of 
mineral pigments that may have been used to draw some form of symbol, 
including simply a color without form, in Middle Stone Age and Middle 
Paleolithic sites has been noted. There also are isolated examples of min-
eral pigment in Lower Paleolithic sites dating to more than 500,000 years 
ago. In all cases, however, it is impossible to demonstrate that the pigments 
were used for any purposes other than purely technological.
At least two items recovered from west Eurasian sites, dating to between 
500,000 and 250,000 years ago, represent possible examples of symbol-
ism. A fragment of elephant bone from Bilzingsleben (eastern Germany) 
exhibits a sequence of evenly spaced, subparallel incisions that suggest an 
abstract design or a notation (for example, recording a series of objects or 
events). Similar patterns are often found on bone, antler, and ivory frag-
ments after 40,000 years ago. The incised lines on the Bilzingsleben piece 
may have been caused by the cutting of soft material against the bone 
surface by a human using a sharp stone flake or the trampling of large 
animals, which is known to cause this sort of damage to bone.86 Although 
neither seems likely to produce such evenly spaced lines of similar length, 
they cannot be categorically excluded as possible causes.
More intriguing is a piece of modified volcanic rock from the Levant 
that resembles a very simple and crude human figurine (figure 3.8). The 
site (Berekhat Ram) is located on the Golan Heights (Syria–Israel border) 
and is dated to between 420,000 and 350,000 years ago. The rock was 
incised in several places with another stone in what appears to be a non-
random fashion. Deep grooves at one end of the rock create what might 

98         modern humans and the super-brain
represent the head of a figurine, while shallow parallel incisions on each 
side could delineate the arms. The Berekhat Ram object has been sub-
jected to careful analysis, and there seems little doubt that the incisions 
were made by a human.87 If it represents a piece of technology, its function 
is unknown. It is a fascinating, if isolated, possible example of early sym-
bolism, apparently in iconic form.
The earliest well-documented evidence of symbolism may be personal 
ornaments in the form of perforated shells that show up roughly 135,000 to 
100,000 years ago in the Near East and North Africa (figure 3.9). The Mid-
dle Paleolithic sites of Skhul (Israel) and Oued Djebbana (Algeria) yielded 
shells of the marine gastropod Nassarius gibbosulus that had been transported 
some distance from the seashore. Shells at Skhul had been perforated with 
a sharp object that was then rotated to enlarge the holes, presumably so that 
they could be suspended around the neck on some form of cord.88
Figure 3.8  A piece of modified volcanic rock from Berekhat Ram on the Golan Heights 
may be a very early example of iconic (?) symbolism. (Drawn from a photograph by Ian T.  
Hoffecker)

modern humans and the super-brain        99
It is not absolutely clear that the shells were used as symbols. Many 
animals have evolved various forms of ornamentation that is devoid of 
semantic or symbolic significance. Perhaps the shells were equally devoid 
of meaning, unlike the symbolic ornaments worn by people in historic 
times and today (for example, the peace sign). However, the subsequent 
pattern of ornament use, including the widespread utilization of perfo-
rated shells in the early Upper Paleolithic, suggests that they were worn 
to indicate social identity or group affiliation.89 A pendant or necklace 
of marine shells would seem to have an entirely arbitrary relationship to 
social or ethnic identity and thus would constitute a true symbol. It may be 
significant that the earliest likely symbols are directly related to social inter-
action and, therefore, suggest integration of thought and the super-brain.
It also may be significant that shell ornaments are associated with the 
remains of anatomically modern humans at Skhul (reflecting a brief and 
limited expansion out of Africa roughly 100,000 years ago that preceded 
the main event, which occurred 60,000 years ago). Oued Djebbana is 
assumed to have been occupied by modern humans, since no Neanderthals 
are known from Africa. Unlike prepared cores, composite implements, 
and mineral pigment, perforated shells and other personal ornaments are 
absent in Neanderthal sites until the arrival of modern humans.90 Their 
appearance in the archaeological record seems to mark a parting of the 
Figure 3.9  Simple ornaments in the form of perforated marine shells appear in the 
archaeological record at least 135,000 years ago. (From Marian Vanhaeran et al., “Middle 
Paleolithic Shell Beads in Israel and Algeria,” Science 312 [2006]: 1786, fig. 1. Copyright 
AAAS 2006)

100         modern humans and the super-brain
ways—the point at which modern humans appear to be moving inexorably 
toward modernity while Neanderthals uphold the status quo.
At Blombos Cave (South Africa), modern humans continued to pro-
duce personal ornaments from marine shells roughly 73,000 years ago, but 
also made some new types of tools: awls and polished points of bone. Most 
significantly, they incised geometric patterns on lumps of red ocher that 
appear to represent abstract designs.91 Most archaeologists seem to regard 
the combined presence of these items, especially the symbols carved into 
the red ocher, as a sure sign that modernity had arrived.
The Archaeology of Alternative Reality
[Y]ou don’t necessarily need the prefrontal cortex to form the men-
tal image of a human or of a fish, but you need it to form the mental 
representation of a mermaid.
Elkhonon Goldberg 
In terms of population ecology, the consequences of the super-brain were 
apocalyptic. Within a few millennia, modern humans spread across most 
of Eurasia and colonized Australia; only special circumstances—a wall of 
glacial ice—delayed settlement of the Western Hemisphere. They adapted 
with amazing speed to an extraordinary range of habitats and climate zones, 
from desert margins and wooded steppe to rain forest and shrub tundra.
Unlike earlier humans, they did not adapt genetically and differentiate 
into multiple species such as Asian Homo erectus and the European Nean-
derthals. Instead, modern humans used their creative powers and their abil-
ity to externalize their thoughts with hand and voice to generate alterna-
tive realities. They redesigned themselves as organisms and, in some places, 
redesigned parts of the environment. In cold regions, they fashioned fur 
clothing, complete with boots and hoods. To enhance their brain func-
tions, they made artificial memory devices. In dark caves, they provided 
light with portable lamps. In landscapes devoid of caves, they built artificial 
shelters. To traverse large bodies of water, they assembled boats.92
In contrast to the relatively stable culture of the Middle Paleolithic and 
even the African Middle Stone Age, the archaeological record for this 
period, which is traditionally classified as the early phase of the Upper 
Paleolithic (or Later Stone Age), reflects continual and often dramatic 
change. There is a shift to Levallois stone-blade technology in the Near 
East, followed by a move to the mass-production of small stone blades. 

modern humans and the super-brain        101
Personal ornaments are common in sites of this period, along with a few 
bone implements.93
The appearance of people in Australia 50,000 years ago indicates water-
craft. Other potentially complex technological innovations are suggested 
by the abundance of small-mammal remains in some Near Eastern and 
European sites, but the devices used to harvest these taxa (for example, 
snares, traps, and throwing darts) have yet to be retrieved. Eyed needles 
recovered from north Eurasian sites dated to 40,000 years ago indicate 
sewn clothing, which probably were made from many hierarchically struc-
tured parts and may have included mechanical components (for example, 
drawstrings for hoods). Both rotary drills and digging implements were 
present on the East European Plain by about 45,000 years ago.94
Visual art in the form of sculpture and cave painting illustrates creativ-
ity in complex hierarchical form. Each work of art is unique and reflects a 
potentially unlimited array of combinatorial variations. The Löwenmensch 
(lion man) ivory sculpture from Hohlenstein-Stadel (southern Germany) 
dates to about 35,000 calibrated radiocarbon years ago. Almost 1 foot 
high, it represents a human figure with the head of what appears to be 
a lion. The sculpture may be deconstructed into many components and 
embedded subcomponents, such as the head with multiple facial features 
or an arm with a hand and digits (figure 3.10).95 The two-dimensional cave 
paintings from southwestern Europe, at least some of which date to the 
early Upper Paleolithic, exhibit even more complexity and variation.
Musical instruments also are found from this time period. The subtle 
shaping of pipes from animal bone is another impressive feat of early Upper 
Paleolithic technology as well as of accumulating technological knowledge 
(in this case, regarding the production of artificial sound variations).96 In 
contrast to the visual art, however, the complexity of the generated musical 
structures remains unknown. The compositions may have been relatively 
simple. I am inclined to think that the complex process of making these 
instruments suggests otherwise, but there is no way to test this notion.
As during more recent times, the pace of change seems to have accel-
erated as modern humans continued to create alternative realities dur-
ing the middle and later phases of the Upper Paleolithic. In some places, 
the size and complexity of settlements increased considerably as people 
invented new ways to harvest foods (for example, nets, spear-throwers 
[atlatls], and barbed harpoons) as well as to prepare and store them (for 
example, baking ovens and refrigerated pits). They figured out how to bake 
clay into ceramic objects, weave fibers into textiles, and domesticate dogs. 

102         modern humans and the super-brain
In the final millennia of the Upper Paleolithic, settlements in some areas 
acquired a village-like appearance that seems to anticipate postglacial sed-
entism and agriculture.97
History began with the emergence of the modern mind. From this point 
onward, the super-brain or collective mind—which reproduced itself in the 
form of various cultures as modern humans dispersed across the Earth—
developed in its own way, as life had evolved after 3.5 billion years ago. By 
creating novel technologies and subsequently expanding and improving 
on them, it was accumulating knowledge about the external world. This 
knowledge was recorded and interpreted in the symbolic internal language 
Figure 3.10  The Löwenmensch figurine carved from mammoth ivory, which was recovered 
from Hohlenstein-Stadel (southern Germany) and is dated to about 35,000 years ago, 
depicts an alternative reality: an imagined combination of human and lion. It is a com-
plex representation with a hierarchical structure.

modern humans and the super-brain        103
of each culture or collective mind. The dynamism was, I believe, a prod-
uct of the unstable and awkward relationship that existed then and now 
between the super-brain and the disgruntled organisms that generated and 
participated in it. The fossil record of the mind is the historical record, 
although it embraces more than the written records of the last few thou-
sand years—it is represented by all forms of external thought.

4
The Upper Paleolithic as History
Our history has always . . . been up to us.
Barack Obama
More than anyone else, V. Gordon Childe (1892–1957) helped shift 
the subject of archaeology from artifacts to people. Nineteenth-century 
archaeology had been dominated by the classification of artifacts, orga-
nized into stratified sequences and interpreted within a framework based 
on a vague theory of progress. Beginning in 1925 with the publication of 
The Dawn of European Civilization, Childe transformed the artifacts into a 
historical narrative: “a preliterate substitute for the conventional politico-
military history with cultures, instead of statesmen, as actors, and migra-
tions in place of battles.”1
Throughout his career, Childe searched for the appropriate framework 
to interpret the archaeological record from a historical perspective. In The 
Dawn, he applied the concept of archaeological culture to the artifacts, and it 
was this innovation that most impressed his colleagues in Britain. Childe 
had borrowed the concept from the German archaeologist Gustav Kossinna 
(1858–1931), whose views on the biological or racial basis of cultural progress 
enjoyed the public approval of leading Nazi officials.2 Childe had rejected such 
ideas in his book, which instead emphasized the diffusion of ideas, and was 
distressed by their link to the archaeological culture concept. In the months 
after Adolf Hitler came to power in March 1933, Childe denounced the 
racial doctrines behind Kossinna’s notion of culture in papers and lectures.3

the upper paleolithic as history        105
In 1934, Childe revised an earlier synthesis on the Near East to include 
two major social and economic upheavals in prehistory: the rise of agri-
culture and the development of urban centers. He later referred to them 
as the Neolithic Revolution and Urban Revolution, respectively. They were 
modeled explicitly on the concept of the Industrial Revolution of the eigh-
teenth and nineteenth centuries and, by analogy with the latter, were tied 
to a significant increase in population density.4 Although Childe’s think-
ing about the Neolithic and Urban revolutions was later attributed to the 
influence of Marxism and Soviet archaeology,5 it was actually another step 
in his continuing effort to approach the prehistoric archaeological record 
from the perspective of a historian. In 1934, he shifted away from culture 
history and turned to the analysis of technological innovation, economic 
change, and their impact on population growth.
In the following year, Childe visited the Soviet Union, where he was 
inspired by the ongoing effort to apply a Marxist framework to the archae-
ological record. This framework was largely derived from the cultural evo-
lutionists of the late nineteenth century, especially Lewis Henry Morgan. 
Although Marx and Engels had accepted it as the ethnology of their day, 
by the 1930s the unilinear evolutionary stages postulated by Morgan and 
his contemporaries had long been abandoned by ethnologists outside the 
Soviet Union. Nevertheless, Childe promptly published Man Makes Him-
self (1936), which combines his prehistoric economic revolutions with a 
Marxist viewpoint—simultaneously articulating his current thinking on 
prehistory and battling the racial archaeology of the Nazis.6 He later wrote 
What Happened in History (1942), resurrecting the antiquated terminology 
of the nineteenth-century evolutionists by labeling the epochs preceding 
civilization as “savagery” (Paleolithic) and “barbarism” (Neolithic).7
In later years, colleagues wondered how serious Childe was about his 
commitment to Marxism and support for the Soviet Union; he often 
wielded them to shock people. Throughout his life, he was a shy and iso-
lated person who never married or formed intimate friendships; some 
thought that his reticence reflected his rather odd physical appearance. 
He had emigrated from Australia to England, where he remained an out-
sider. He subsequently accepted an academic post in Edinburgh, where he 
repeatedly scandalized the local regime and later published—as a “parting 
insult”—a Marxist prehistory of Scotland. He wore strange hats and exotic 
clothing. Arriving at an expensive hotel, he demanded to know why cop-
ies of the Daily Worker were not available to guests. In public lectures, he 
outraged his audience with quotations from Comrade Stalin.8

106         the upper paleolithic as history
Childe is probably best remembered for his Marxist and cultural evolu-
tionary views. He became a victim of his own success, and Man Makes Him-
self and What Happened in History remain his most widely known works. 
When cultural evolutionism was revived in North America in the mid-
twentieth century, he was solemnly acknowledged for his earlier writings. 
But Childe continued to think about an appropriate framework for the 
archaeological record, and during the last decade of his life, he developed 
something rather different from his earlier perspective. His principal biog-
rapher, Bruce Trigger, observed that “this was a period of lonely inno-
vation, much of which was too easily dismissed by contemporary British 
archaeologists as more examples of ‘Gordon’s naughtiness.’ It was also a 
period when major shifts occurred in his thinking, which produced real or 
seeming contradictions in his writings . . . an important creative phase . . . 
that significantly altered and developed his earlier contributions.”9 Childe 
was influenced by the British philosopher and historian R. G. Colling-
wood (1889–1943), and his later publications reflect Collingwood’s ideal-
ist perspective.10
Collingwood was himself an isolated and iconoclastic figure. He prac-
ticed philosophy, history, and historical archaeology during a period when 
natural science had almost completely overwhelmed the philosophy of his-
tory. This was due in part to the impact of Darwin’s ideas, but had deeper 
roots in the Enlightenment. Two popular historical works of the time were 
Oswald Spengler’s Decline of the West (1926–1928) and the first volumes of 
Arnold Toynbee’s massive Study of History (1934), both of which treat soci-
eties and cultures as organisms that develop through a natural life cycle. 
Collingwood regarded these studies as manifestations of the “tyranny of 
natural science” over history, which he believed to be “a special and auton-
omous form of thought.”11 He placed the human mind at the center of 
history: “Unlike the natural scientist, the historian is not concerned with 
events as such at all. He is only concerned with those events which are the 
outward expression of thoughts, and is only concerned with these in so far 
as they express thoughts” (italics added).12 Shortly after the posthumous 
publication of Collingwood’s book The Idea of History (1946), Childe wrote 
History (1947), which Trigger described as a turning point, a small volume 
in which he melded Collingwood’s vision of history with his own interpre-
tation of Marxism, emphasizing the role of invention and its relationship 
to social and economic change.13 History, he wrote, is fundamentally a 
“creative process,”14 and several years later, he openly rejected the cultural 
evolutionary schemes of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries for their 

the upper paleolithic as history        107
implicit “magic force that does the work of the concrete individual factors 
that shape the course of history.”15
Childe’s later thinking was articulated in Society and Knowledge (1956), 
published a year before his death.16 In this most interesting and thoughtful 
of his many books, he presented a theory of progress based on the obser-
vation that human societies increase their control over the environment 
by creating new technologies. By improving their ability to manipulate 
the world, societies acquire knowledge about the way it works (that is, the 
“sensory hand”), which they tend to explain in terms of the technologies 
(for example, the mechanistic worldview that developed in Europe after 
1200).17 Childe stressed the social character of both invention and the 
accumulation of knowledge. But the central theme of the book is human 
creativity, which he defined as “not making something out of nothing, 
but refashioning what already is.”18 He had at last found the appropriate 
framework to interpret the archaeological record as a historical narrative.
By defining history in terms of thought—”all history is the history of 
thought”19—Collingwood made prehistory, or at least a portion of it, part of 
history; as a historical archaeologist specializing in Roman Britain, he wrote 
about reconstructing the past “from documents written and unwritten.”20 
And as Childe incorporated Collingwood’s ideas into his later writings, he 
repeatedly referred to artifacts as “concrete expressions and embodiments of 
human thoughts and ideas.”21 The goal of the archaeologist, he stated, is “to 
recapture the thoughts” expressed by the people who created the artifacts, 
and he noted that, by so doing, the archaeologist “becomes an historian.”22 
He emphasized that the accumulation of knowledge—the history of science—
had begun long before the invention of writing.23
In theory, history as defined by Collingwood and Childe can be 
extended back to the Lower Paleolithic, especially since the appearance of 
the Acheulean bifaces 1.6 million years ago provides archaeologists with 
an externalized mental representation. Before the emergence of the mod-
ern mind, however, the lack of creativity manifest in the archaeological 
record makes for a rather dull narrative. It was not until the advent of 
the super-brain and modernity—of potentially infinite creativity in both 
symbolic and nonsymbolic form—that human societies began to accumu-
late and interpret knowledge on the scale that Childe had in mind. The 
interval described in chapter 3, corresponding with the Middle Paleolithic 
in Eurasia and the Middle Stone Age in Africa, seems to lie somewhere in 
between. It contains evidence of innovation and accumulating knowledge, 
but until the later African Middle Stone Age, it is very limited.

108         the upper paleolithic as history
The archaeological record of the first 40,000 years of the modern mind 
is traditionally classified as the Upper Paleolithic (Later Stone Age in Africa). 
Like the other subdivisions of the early archaeological record, the term 
“Upper Paleolithic” is itself a piece of fossilized thought. It was proposed 
in western Europe during the mid-nineteenth century, when all prehistory 
was viewed as an epoch of gradual progress.24 As more sites were excavated 
during the final decades of the nineteenth and the early years of the twen-
tieth century, some archaeologists began to see a major break in the record 
at the start of the Upper Paleolithic.25 Soviet archaeologists inserted this 
break into the Marxist evolutionary scheme that Childe initially embraced 
and later abandoned.26 But at the beginning of the twenty-first century, 
the original classificatory framework remains in place. Upper Paleolithic is 
used here as a label with the sole virtue of familiarity.
The reclassification of the Upper Paleolithic as history is more than a mat-
ter of semantics and formal definition. It reflects recognition not only that 
the process of accumulating knowledge about the external world through 
creative innovation was already under way, but that the technological 
knowledge acquired was substantive and significant. It was knowledge that 
had a major impact on the human population; Upper Paleolithic settle-
ments reached unprecedented size and complexity, and overall population 
density almost certainly increased. Moreover, it seems to have provided the 
requisite base of knowledge for what followed after the Upper Paleolithic: 
agricultural villages and urban centers. There is reason to doubt that these 
developments would have taken place without the accumulation of tech-
nological knowledge during the preceding 40,000 years.27
Upper Paleolithic history also reflects recognition that the accumulation 
of knowledge is the essence of the historical process—with or without written 
records—and that “prehistoric” archaeological data can provide a significant 
part of the story. We do not know a single word spoken by the peoples of the 
Upper Paleolithic, but we do know a great deal about their thoughts. Arti-
facts that offer evidence of technological knowledge—tools, weapons, facili-
ties, and structures—are filled with information derived from the collective 
mind of each Upper Paleolithic society. These modified pieces of organic 
and inorganic material are literally part of the mind, remnants of hierar-
chically structured thought that existed (and still exists!) outside individual 
human brains. To understand history, Collingwood asserted, the historian 
discerns the thoughts of the past “by rethinking them in his own mind.”28
Moreover, changes in artifacts and features observed over time (other 
than stylistic changes) provide a record of how thought progressed over 

the upper paleolithic as history        109
time and how knowledge of the external world and how it works devel-
oped during the Upper Paleolithic. By the later phases of the period, peo-
ple in many places understood more about physics, chemistry, and biology 
than had their predecessors, as well as how to apply this knowledge to 
achieve desired ends. The archaeological record of the late Upper Paleo-
lithic reveals that people thought differently than they had earlier—their 
minds had changed.
The Age of Art and Music
Is the conception of nature and of social relations which underlies 
Greek imagination and therefore Greek [art] possible when there are 
self-acting mules, railways, locomotives and electric telegraphs?
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels
The most mysterious and fascinating period in the modern human past is 
the interval between 50,000 and 30,000 years ago,29 which is often referred 
to as the early Upper Paleolithic (or, simply and affectionately, the EUP). 
Along with the final phase of the African Middle Stone Age, it represents 
the initial outing of the super-brain and the modern mind. It may have 
been uniquely primitive, relative to later periods, with respect to technol-
ogy because the people of the EUP were just beginning to create the tools, 
weapons, and other gadgets that would eventually be commonplace among 
foraging societies (especially at higher latitudes).30 Adding to the mystery of 
this period is that EUP sites are often small and hard to find, particularly 
in places where caves and rock shelters are absent.
If the technology is primitive, the visual art and musical instruments 
of the EUP are remarkably sophisticated. Visual art includes sculptures of 
humans, animals, and a mixture of both, as well as the earliest dated cave 
drawings and paintings. The creative character of these iconic representa-
tions, which exhibit a potentially infinite array of combinatorial variations 
within a complex hierarchical structure, was presented in chapter 3 as an 
unambiguous manifestation of the modern mind.31 And although the 
structure of EUP music is unknown, the subtle design of the wind instru-
ments reveals an impressive knowledge of musical sound (figure 4.1).32
What is striking about the art and music of the EUP is not their promi-
nence and sophistication compared with those of the later phases of the 
Upper Paleolithic, but their contrast with the technology of the time. 
During the middle and late Upper Paleolithic, the technology became 

110         the upper paleolithic as history
considerably more complicated, while the art and music—at least the 
design of the musical instruments—appears to have remained fundamen-
tally unchanged.33 The gulf between the structural complexity of art and 
of technology became even more pronounced after the Upper Paleo-
lithic, and it has been especially stark in the machine era (and although 
music did become more complex, this trend seems to have been related 
to developments in the technology of musical-sound production). More-
over, written records show that the structure of language also remained 
fundamentally unchanged in later periods of accelerating technological 
complexity. The contrast between art and language, on the one hand, and 
technology, on the other, reflects the fact that they represent different 
parts of the mind. Art and language are almost entirely internal to the 
super-brain or collective mind; they are the primary means of super-brain 
integration. Through the medium of visual art, individuals project artifi-
cial representations that bear a rather obvious relationship to the inter-
nal natural visual representations of the catarrhine brain. Language is 
projected through a medium as well—the human voice—but this masks its 
true character. Language is integrated with sensory cognition (auditory, 
visual, and tactile [in the case of braille]), but its core elements have no 
sound, color, or feel; they probably reside in the neural pathways of the 
neocortex itself. Technology is both internal and external to the mind. 
Its internal aspect is the sharing of artifacts or thoughts about artifacts 
among individuals or groups. Its external aspect lies at the interface of 
the mind and the world outside the mind, where the mind engages the 
world. Most human technology is designed with nongenetic information, 
and an artifact is analogous to an organism—the phenotypic expression 
of that information. By the beginning of the EUP, modern humans had 
Figure 4.1  The earliest evidence for the creation of musical sounds and structures is 
at least broadly coincident with the earliest evidence for the production of visual art 
and creative technology, and surprisingly sophisticated musical instruments (“pipes”) are 
dated to more than 30,000 years ago, including this specimen, recovered from Geissen-
klösterle (southern Germany). (Redrawn from Francesco d’Errico et al., “Archaeological 
Evidence for the Emergence of Language, Symbolism, and Music—An Alternative Multi-
disciplinary Perspective,” Journal of World Prehistory 17 [2003]: 41, fig. 11b)

the upper paleolithic as history        111
evolved a mental capacity analogous to sex—potentially infinite recombi-
nation of the bits of information.  
Gordon Childe was one of many thinkers who noted the apparent 
connection between the clocks and other machines that arose in western 
Europe after 1200 and the mechanistic worldview that accompanied the 
new technology. He sensed a link between technology and the way the 
world is interpreted through language and art, although neither he nor 
anyone else has been able to explain precisely how it works. It seems clear, 
nevertheless, that as the structural complexity of technology has increased—
bringing with it revelations of the ways in which the world works—the world 
has been reinterpreted in new ways (even if the structural complexity of the 
systems employed to explain it have remained fundamentally unchanged). 
The worldview of the early civilizations was probably as different from that 
of the hunter-gatherer societies that preceded them as it was from that of 
western Europe after 1200.34
If the technology of the EUP was uniquely primitive in comparison 
with those of the later phases of the Upper Paleolithic and of hunter-
gatherers of the post-Paleolithic era, did EUP people perceive and 
explain the external world in their own peculiar way? And, given the 
widely held assumption among historians of technology that worldview 
affects the capacity for innovation,35 did the way in which the EUP mind 
interpreted the outside world influence the pace of technological change 
during this mysterious period? It is impossible to answer these questions 
because we can only guess at the content of the EUP worldview and 
the meaning of the few symbols yielded by its archaeological record. As 
we study the pattern of change in all areas of material culture between 
50,000 and 30,000 years ago, however, I believe that we should keep these  
questions in mind.
Some archaeologists view the EUP as “transitional” or intermediate 
between the late Middle Paleolithic and the later phases of the Upper 
Paleolithic. This idea is related to a once widely held notion that living 
Europeans evolved directly from the local Neanderthals. It remains popu-
lar among those who believe that the Neanderthals contributed geneti-
cally and/or culturally to modern humans. But it has become more diffi-
cult to sustain in recent years in light of the discoveries of EUP sculptures 
and paintings, as well as the new analysis of musical instruments, all of 
which suggest that the people of the EUP had “the same cognitive and 
communication faculties” as living humans. There are still dramatic dif-
ferences between the EUP and the later Upper Paleolithic, but they seem 

112         the upper paleolithic as history
to be confined to technology and economics—the same sort of differences 
apparent in historic times that reflect the gradual accumulation of new 
inventions and their impact on population density and settlement size.
Another factor that contributes to the false impression of the EUP as a 
transitional stage is the profusion of archaeological sites in many parts of 
northern Eurasia that date to this interval and contain a mixture of typi-
cal Middle and Upper Paleolithic artifacts. They are assigned to industries 
like the Uluzzian in Italy and the Szeletian in Hungary and other parts of 
central Europe. The artifacts include some types known only in Upper 
Paleolithic (or late African Middle Stone Age) industries, such as shell 
ornaments and bone points, alongside classic Middle Paleolithic stone-
tool forms, such as scrapers made on flakes and small bifaces. In some 
cases, the mixture is thought to reflect the adoption of Upper Paleolithic 
traits by local Neanderthal groups; in others, it is viewed as the gradual 
development of technology by modern humans slow to abandon the tradi-
tions of the past.36
A more parsimonious explanation of the Middle Paleolithic tools 
in these sites is that they represent simple expedient forms that were 
used for certain tasks, especially the butchery of large-mammal car-
casses. Modern humans continued to make such tools long after the 
EUP, and they are particularly common at sites in North America where 
large mammals were killed and butchered. The source of the confusion 
probably lies in the inherent biases of the west European archaeological 
record, which is heavily skewed toward habitation sites in caves (where 
these tool types are present but not abundant). For historical reasons, 
the interpretive framework of western Europe was applied far beyond 
its boundaries. In eastern Europe, where caves are often absent, a wider 
range of sites are found; some of them are kill-butchery locations that 
predictably contain many Middle Paleolithic tool types. In short, the 
presence of such tools in EUP sites probably has little to do with the 
Middle Paleolithic.37
Ironically, some of the earliest known traces of the EUP outside 
Africa are from distant Australia. When modern humans began to 
expand out of Africa, they apparently moved eastward across tropical 
Eurasia, perhaps initially along the coast of the Indian Ocean (figure 
4.2).38 Archaeological evidence of the south Asian migration remains 
to be found, but both artifacts and human skeletal remains show up in 
Australia by 50,000 years ago. Their presence alone is significant, since 
even the shortest water crossing of 55 miles from Southeast Asia indi-

the upper paleolithic as history        113
cates some form of watercraft, which seems to have precluded earlier set-
tlement. Freshwater-shell middens are dated in both southeastern Aus-
tralia (Willandra Lakes) and Papua New Guinea to more than 40,000 
calibrated radiocarbon years ago, while evidence of marine-resource use 
is slightly younger.39
As in northern Eurasia, personal ornaments of perforated shell and 
other materials are found in the earliest phase of the EUP in Australia. 
And although musical instruments have yet to be recovered from an EUP 
context there, very early evidence of visual art is known at Carpenter’s Gap 
(northwestern Australia) in the form of a fragment of a rock-shelter wall—
apparently painted with ocher—that fell into deposits dated to roughly 
46,000 to 39,000 years ago.40 As elsewhere, technology remained relatively 
simple during the EUP in Australia. Points and other implements made of 
bone are generally scarce and thus far unknown from the earlier phases of 
the EUP (although this may be a function of sampling error and preserva-
tion bias).41
Figure 4.2  Modern humans spread out of Africa and into Eurasia and Australia roughly 
50,000 years ago. Their rapid occupation of a wide variety of habitats and climate zones 
appears to have been largely a consequence of their unprecedented ability to redesign 
themselves with technology.

114         the upper paleolithic as history
Above latitude 30o North, the EUP materializes on Africa’s doorstep 
in the Levant also roughly 50,000 years ago. The archaeological record 
in the eastern Mediterranean is different from that in Australia and illus-
trates how, as they dispersed out of Africa into different parts of Eurasia 
and Australia, modern human groups began to develop their own local 
historical peculiarities. The succession of industries in the Levant between 
50,000 and 40,000 years ago also illustrates the potential for rapid innova-
tion and constant change.
Some isolated bone implements are found in this industry, as well 
as the ubiquitous personal ornaments in the form of perforated marine 
shells.42 But the principal changes are manifest in the stone-tool technol-
ogy, which began with a shift toward the production of long blades—in 
addition to triangular points—from prepared (Levallois) cores. As before, 
the stone points were attached to wooden shafts as spear tips, but the 
blades were chipped into tools that are considered generally typical of 
the Upper Paleolithic—especially end scrapers and burins. The technol-
ogy gradually moved toward the mass-production of thin bladelets and 
narrow points that were struck off the cores with a “soft hammer” (bone 
or antler). The gradual character of the transition has been nicely docu-
mented in recent excavations at Üçagˇizli Cave on the southeastern coast 
of Turkey.43
The series of industries in the Levant after 50,000 years ago may 
illustrate something even more fundamental about the modern human 
mind than the capacity for rapid innovation. It is difficult to explain the 
changes, especially the later changes, as a result of external factors, such as 
climate or interactions with other species. The inhabitants of the Levant 
had begun to make their own history—driven by the internal dynam-
ics of human society and the collective mind. While the initial changes 
in stone-tool technology could conceivably reflect the response of an 
incoming population from northeastern Africa to novel environments 
and/or local competitors (Neanderthals), it is hard to account for the 
subsequent shift to soft-hammer production of small blades and narrow 
points in either terms. The Neanderthals seem to have vanished from the 
Levant by 50,000 years ago, and the climate—although oscillating—was  
generally mild.44
Both climate change and nonhuman species have had effects on human 
societies throughout prehistory and history, but after the advent of moder-
nity other factors have been at work. In historic times, following the emer-
gence of the early civilizations, the primary external factor in shaping  

the upper paleolithic as history        115
societies probably has been the impact of other societies. Climate change 
often has altered the course of history, such as the consequences of the 
Little Ice Age on European society and the impact of El Niño on the Clas-
sic Maya. Catastrophic events like the volcanic eruption on the island of 
Santorini roughly 3,600 years ago in the eastern Mediterranean also repre-
sent a periodic external factor. And other organisms, especially pathogens 
such as Pasteurella pestis (bubonic plague bacillus), have had an impact on 
history.45 But there have been many developments, such as the invention 
of the printing press and the cotton gin, with significant consequences for 
human societies that cannot be plausibly ascribed to global warming, fall-
ing asteroids, or killer bees. These internal factors probably were at work 
during the EUP.
Most of what we know about the EUP is based on archaeological sites in 
Europe, which is a reflection of the long history of discovery and research 
in that part of the world. For the Upper Paleolithic, this is especially true 
in western Europe, where Paleolithic archaeology had its beginnings. It 
also reflects the high visibility of Upper Paleolithic sites in caves and rock 
shelters—nicely preserved and easily discovered—which are predominant 
in southwestern France and northern Spain but also known in Italy, Ger-
many, and Austria. In central and eastern Europe, open-air sites are more 
common, and, in some areas, rock shelters are completely absent. Outside 
Europe, a number of Upper Paleolithic sites—including EUP sites—are 
known from southern Siberia.46
The northern bias of the EUP archaeological record has one advantage: 
it offers a rich source of data on how modern humans, recent migrants from 
the equatorial zone, adjusted to cooler and more seasonally variable envi-
ronments. Their skeletal remains reveal anatomical proportions typical for 
living peoples of the tropics—tall and thin, with long limbs—who are adapted 
to warm climates.47 Such people are more susceptible to cold injury and loss 
of core body temperature (hypothermia), and they require cultural buffering 
in the form of insulated clothing and heated shelters. One of the most strik-
ing aspects of the wide geographic dispersal of modern humans 50,000 years 
ago is how the biogeographic “rules” of climate adaptation did not apply. 
Human groups living in higher latitudes eventually developed stockier bod-
ies and shorter extremities, which reduce heat loss and the potential for 
frostbite, but during the EUP, adaptation to northern environments was 
achieved almost entirely through the creation of new technologies.48
It may be significant that the earliest traces of the EUP in Europe 
coincide with a warm-climate oscillation. According to the Greenland ice 

116         the upper paleolithic as history
cores, which provide the most detailed and comprehensive record of cli-
mate change in the Northern Hemisphere for the period (based on oxygen 
isotope fluctuations), temperatures increased sharply a few centuries after 
48,000 years ago. Greenland Interstadial 12 began with a warm peak that 
was followed by a gradual cooling until colder climates returned shortly 
before 44,000 years ago. Artifact assemblages dating to this interval that 
bear a close resemblance to the oldest EUP industry of the Levant—that is 
Levallois blades and points with typical Upper Paleolithic tools—are found 
in southeastern and south-central Europe. Other than isolated bone imple-
ments, there is little evidence of novel technology, although this may be 
due largely to the biases of preservation, sampling, and site function. Most 
of these sites are thought to be stone-tool workshops.49
Because only isolated human skeletal remains that cannot be firmly 
identified as those of particular species are found in these sites, some 
archaeologists are hesitant to ascribe them to modern humans. In the-
ory, the artifacts could have been made by local Neanderthals, and at 
least a few archaeologists are convinced that they were. Such a view is 
compatible with the widely held notion that the European Neander-
thals produced several industries comprising a mixture of Middle and 
Upper Paleolithic artifact types.50 However, there is consensus that the 
next batch of artifact assemblages to appear in southeastern Europe, at 
roughly 45,000 years ago, were most probably made by modern humans. 
The sites also lack diagnostic human skeletal remains, but they contain 
small bladelets and narrow points similar to those that were produced in 
the Levant before 40,000 years ago, which are associated with indisput-
ably modern human remains in Lebanon, as well as other typical EUP 
artifact forms. Often referred to as the Proto-Aurignacian industry, this 
group of assemblages is found in caves and open-air sites in Italy and the 
Balkans.51
The EUP in Europe between 45,000 and 40,000 years ago is best rep-
resented on the East European Plain at a concentration of open-air sites 
on the Don River about 250 miles south of Moscow. The sites are located 
around a series of ravines incised into the west bank of the main valley 
around the villages of Kostenki and Borshchevo (figure 4.3). The EUP 
remains are buried in a thick bed of silt and fine rubble, inter-layered 
with lenses of carbonate formed by seeps and springs. The oldest levels 
lie beneath a volcanic-ash horizon deposited by an immense eruption in 
southern Italy (Campanian Ignimbrite) that spewed a cloud of ash across 
much of southeastern Europe. The ash is firmly dated to 40,000 years ago 

the upper paleolithic as history        117
and is represented in the Greenland ice cores, where it precedes a major 
cold-climate event.52
Mammoth bones were discovered at Kostenki centuries ago, but the 
associated Paleolithic artifacts were not recognized until 1879. In the 1930s, 
Soviet archaeologists excavated massive feature complexes of middle Upper 
Paleolithic age; the occupation floor patterns were used in the debates 
over the application of Marxist cultural evolutionary models to archaeol-
ogy that intrigued Gordon Childe. Although older EUP occupations were 
known as early as 1928, they were investigated on a large scale only after 
Figure 4.3  Much of the evidence for settlement on the East European Plain in the early 
Upper Paleolithic is derived from a group of sites around the villages of Kostenki and 
Borshchevo on the Don River (Russia).

118         the upper paleolithic as history
World War II, under the direction of A. N. Rogachev (1912–1981).53 With-
out the extensive earlier excavations of the younger levels, the EUP layers 
probably would have remained largely unknown because most are deeply 
buried and rarely exposed by erosion or other disturbances.
The excavations by Rogachev and more recent investigations exposed 
EUP occupation floors in many of the Kostenki sites (and lately at Bor-
shchevo), ultimately revealing a unique “EUP landscape” across which peo-
ple moved, camped, and engaged in various activities. Some of the sites rep-
resent locations where large mammals—chiefly horse, but also reindeer and 
mammoth—were killed and butchered. They contain the same types of stone 
artifacts (points, bifaces, and scrapers) found at kill-butchery sites of different 
times and places. Other locations show traces of camps that were occupied 
for at least a few days, perhaps longer, yielding a diverse array of artifacts and 
other debris. The Kostenki–Borshchevo sites offer a more complete view of 
EUP society and economy than do the caves of southwestern Europe.54
The analysis of pollen-spore samples in layers below the oldest EUP levels 
at Kostenki indicates an interval of very mild climates that dates to more 
than 44,000 years ago and may correspond to Greenland Interstadial 12. 
Occupation during the EUP probably began at about the same time that the 
Proto-Aurigancian industry arrived in southern Europe, and at least some of 
same types of artifacts found in Italy and the Balkans are present at Kostenki–
Borshchevo. In addition to bone points and awls, digging implements made 
of antler and ornaments perforated with a hand-operated rotary drill were 
found in the lowest levels. Perhaps most significant from a technological and 
economic perspective are the concentrations of small-mammal remains and 
some bird remains, indicating the expansion of diet and most probably the 
production of new devices for harvesting these foods (for example, snares, 
nets, and throwing darts). One of the Kostenki sites yielded what may be the 
oldest known visual art in the world—a small piece of carved mammoth ivory 
that resembles a human head and neck (figure 4.4). It may represent part of 
an unfinished human figurine that broke during carving.
Settlement at Kostenki–Borshchevo must have ended 40,000 years 
ago with the Campanian Ignimbrite eruption and ash fall across the East 
European Plain. In some places, the ash layer is several inches thick and 
presumably wiped out most plant and animal life for a while. The cata-
strophic eruption also inaugurated a period of intense and sustained cold 
climate (known as Heinrich Event 4).55 During this time, the most widely 
known EUP industry—the classic Aurignacian—spread across Europe. Con-
ditions were so extreme in southwestern France that trees became scarce, 

the upper paleolithic as history        119
and the local inhabitants burned fresh bone as a substitute for wood fuel.56 
On the East European Plain, which eventually was reoccupied by Aurigna-
cian folk, eyed needles of bone and ivory provide early evidence of sewn 
clothing (figure 4.5A).57
Overall, the technology of the later EUP remains simple in comparison 
with that of later periods, however, and the size and complexity of the 
settlements are modest. The best-known example of Aurignacian technol-
ogy is the split-base point carved from a piece of deer antler, which was 
designed to wedge tightly into the socket of a spear shaft, reflecting famil-
iarity with the elastic properties of antler and the way to exploit them 
for improved spear construction (figure 4.5B).58 A fishing gorge from Italy 
indicates cleverly applied knowledge of fish behavior. Also noteworthy is 
the evidence for simple information technology, represented by fragments 
of bone and ivory that exhibit sequences of engraved marks. But many of 
the more complex technologies of the later Upper Paleolithic, including 
mechanical spear-throwers (atlatls) and high-temperature kilns, were still 
to come. The occupation areas of EUP sites are relatively small. Traces of 
Figure 4.4  The earliest known specimen of visual art is a fragment of carved ivory from 
Russia that is dated to roughly 44,000 years ago and appears to represent the head and 
neck of an (unfinished?) human figurine (height = 2 inches). (Adapted from Andrei A. 
Sinitsyn, “Nizhnie Kul’turnye Sloi Kostenok 14 [Markina Gora] [Raskopi 1998–2001 
gg.],” in Kostenki v Kontekste Paleolita Evrazii, ed. Andrei A. Sinitsyn, V. Ya. Sergin, and 
John F. Hoffecker [St. Petersburg: Russian Academy of Sciences, 2002], 230, fig. 9)

120         the upper paleolithic as history
former dwellings are rare and indicate ephemeral structures—tents erected 
with wooden poles and walls of mammal hide—apparently used for limited 
periods by small groups.
It is during this phase of the EUP that the contrast between the visual 
art and the musical instruments, which are represented by spectacular 
finds at sites in western Europe, becomes so striking. Controversy con-
tinues to surround the dating of the paintings in Chauvet Cave (southern 
France), which may be younger than previously reported, but they can be 
tentatively assigned to the EUP. In any case, the Löwenmensch sculpture 
from Hohlenstein-Stadel, as well as several recently discovered Aurigna-
cian sculptures from Hohle Fels Cave (southern Germany), illustrate the 
capacity to create visual art of comparable complexity to that at Chavet. 
Among the objects from Hohle Fels are a female figurine and a therian-
thropic representation reminiscent of the Löwenmensch.59 To these may be 
added the famous animal carvings from Vogelherd Cave (southern Ger-
many) and the “dancing lady” stone sculpture from Galgenburg (Austria). 
Figure 4.5  Two notable technological innovations of the EUP: (A) eyed needles manufac-
tured from bone and ivory date to around 35,000 years ago in eastern Europe and presum-
ably reflect the need for sewn winter clothing (after A. N. Rogachev and A. A. Sinitsyn, 
“Kostenki 15 [Gorodtsovskaya Stoyanka],” in Paleolit Kostenkovsko-Borshchevskogo Raiona na 
Donu, 1879–1979, ed. N. D. Praslov and A. N. Rogachev [Leningrad: Nauka, 1982], 170, 
fig. 59); (B) the split-base point was an application of the elastic properties of deer antler 
(redrawn from Paul Mellars, The Neanderthal Legacy: An Archaeological Perspective from West-
ern Europe [Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1996], 394, fig. 13.1).
A 
 
 
 
    B

the upper paleolithic as history        121
Finely crafted wind instruments (pipes) from Geissenklösterle (Germany) 
and Hohle Fels Cave are from the same time range.60
The later EUP occupations at Kostenki yielded at least one burial con-
taining, in addition to the bones and teeth of the deceased, grave offerings 
in the form of ornaments and tools as well as generous inclusions of red 
and yellow ocher.61 If the meaning of EUP visual art remains obscure, 
there can be little doubt that the grave offerings pertain to belief in an 
afterlife. The steadfast denial of the reality of death is one of the most 
characteristic elements of every known culture and reflects the ghastly 
dilemma that confronts an organism with the faculty of abstract thought 
or “intentionality”—recognition of the inevitability of its own death.62 
Only behaviorally modern humans seem to have faced this dilemma; there 
are some Neanderthal burials, but they lack any convincing traces of ritual 
and symbolism.63
The Gravettian: An Industrial Revolution
Technology is explained by history and in turn explains history. . . . 
It is not a linear process.
Fernand Braudel
Gordon Childe may have overlooked the first economic revolution in pre-
history, which arguably took place between 30,000 and 25,000 years ago in 
northern Eurasia. Perhaps he did not regard the social and demographic 
consequences as sufficiently profound, especially when measured against 
the tectonic upheavals of food production and urbanization.64 It seems, 
nevertheless, to have followed the classic pattern that Childe envisioned: 
a wave of technological innovation associated with significant growth 
in settlement size and population density. But in an Upper Paleolithic 
context, it is difficult to sort out the cause-and-effect relationships. Many 
of the innovations seem to have been unrelated to economy and popula-
tion and may have been a result instead of a cause of the increased size  
of communities.
In Europe, this phase of the Upper Paleolithic (often referenced as the 
middle Upper Paleolithic) is associated with the Gravettian industry or 
culture, which is broadly distributed across the continent from Spain to 
Russia. The Gravettian is best known for its evocative “Venus” figurines, 
carved in ivory and stone and sometimes modeled in fired clay. Another 
characteristic and common artifact is the shouldered stone point (often 

122         the upper paleolithic as history
used as a knife). The most significant archaeological remains of the Gra-
vettian, however, are the often large and complex settlements comprising 
hearths, pits, and other features.65 These settlements suggest gatherings, 
at least on a temporary basis, of unprecedented size and are the principal 
basis for the inferred growth in population. Traces of similar settlements, 
although not classified as Gravettian, are found in southern Siberia at  
this time.66
The Gravettian emerged from the EUP immediately before the begin-
ning of the Last Glacial Maximum (23,000 to 22,000 years ago). Climates 
were becoming increasingly cold and dry—especially in eastern Europe 
and Siberia, where isolation from the moderating influence of the North 
Atlantic Ocean produces more continental conditions. Periglacial steppe 
environments inhabited by a curious mixture of arctic-tundra and tem-
perate-grassland species developed in these regions. Some archaeologists 
have suggested that the burst of technological innovation associated with 
the Gravettian was a response to the cooling climates.67 There is a strong 
correlation between technological complexity and latitude among forag-
ing peoples,68 and at least some of the novel instruments and devices of 
the Gravettian reflect the presence of cold conditions.69 But the pace of 
technological innovation continued, and probably even accelerated, after 
the Last Glacial Maximum and during the period of gradually warming 
temperatures that followed.
As in the EUP, I suspect, internal factors were at work, for external 
variables such as climate and other species probably account for only some 
of the culture change that took place during Gravettian times. The critical 
question is one that Childe raised in his best known books: What acceler-
ates innovation, and what retards it?70 What helps unleash the creativity 
of the mind—and facilitates the acceptance of new ideas—and what sup-
presses novel thinking? History is filled with examples of societies that 
stagnated, some of which suffered partial or complete destruction as a con-
sequence; there are also historical examples of societies that experienced 
waves of invention and dramatic change.71 Less attention has been paid to 
prehistoric societies in this regard, but it is apparent from the archaeologi-
cal record that foraging peoples of the past underwent similar episodes of 
change, as well as protracted periods of stability. There may be a strong 
tendency among archaeologists to ascribe the advances in prehistoric soci-
eties to environmental factors, but I see no reason to exclude a role for the 
same variables, such as worldview and social institutions, that seem to have 
affected innovation in historical societies.

the upper paleolithic as history        123
The population growth associated with the appearance of the Gravet-
tian is inferred from the size and complexity of the remains of the settle-
ments. The largest sites are thought to have been places where a large 
number of people (perhaps 50 to 100) assembled for at least a few days and 
perhaps several weeks. Although the famous Gravettian sites are in central 
Europe (for example, Dolní Veˇstonice [eastern Czech Republic]), the most 
extensive settlements seem to lie on the East European Plain at places like 
Avdeevo, Zaraisk, and the uppermost level at Kostenki 1, all in Russia (fig-
ure 4.6).72 At these sites, linearly arranged hearths are surrounded by large 
pits; they apparently represent integrated-feature complexes constructed 
during a single episode of occupation. Perhaps some or all of these tem-
porary aggregations were designed to exploit a concentration of a food 
resource, such as a fish run; stable isotope analyses of human bone from 
several sites indicates a high level of consumption of freshwater foods.73 
It seems likely, however, that these complexes were also used to reinforce 
social ties through rituals, feasts, and other public events.
Some of the population growth may reflect the impact of periglacial 
climates on flora and fauna in eastern Europe and southern Siberia. The 
cold and aridity were favorable to steppe species like bison and tundra 
dwellers like reindeer, and the large-mammal biomass may have increased 
relative to that in the generally milder conditions that had prevailed dur-
ing the EUP. But a significant factor in population growth probably was 
the accumulated technological knowledge of the EUP—perhaps, especially, 
the late EUP—and possibly a wave of innovation that marked the begin-
ning of the Gravettian. Novel inventions and improvements over existing 
technologies to harvest, prepare, and store food probably increased the 
number of people who could support themselves per unit area. Gravettian 
sites yielded the first evidence of nets, for example,74 which may have been 
used to catch birds, fish, and small mammals like hare. A boomerang is 
reported from a site in Poland.75
The Gravettians knew how to manipulate temperature for various pur-
poses, and they constructed miniature worlds in which temperature could 
be controlled. At least some of the large pits in their sites were apparently 
dug down to the permafrost level during warmer months to create “ice 
cellars” for cold storage of perishables (figure 4.7A). In areas where wood 
was scarce or absent and bone was used as fuel, these pits probably were 
used to keep supplies of bone fresh and flammable.76 Even more impres-
sive was their fired-ceramic technology. Modeled-clay objects were heated 
to temperatures of at least 1,500oF in constructed kilns (figure 4.7B).77 Like 

Figure 4.6  A Gravettian settlement in Russia, illustrating the complex arrangement of 
hearths and pits: Kostenki 1, Layer I, second feature complex, was excavated in the 1970s 
by A. N. Rogachev and others. (Modified from A. N. Rogachev et al., “Kostenki 1 [Stoy-
anka Polyakova],” in Paleolit Kostenkovsko-Borshchevskogo Raiona na Donu, 1879–1979, ed. 
N. D. Praslov and A. N. Rogachev [Leningrad: Nauka, 1982], 45, fig. 11)

Figure 4.7  Technological applications of temperature in controlled artificial micro-envi-
ronments: (A) a cold-storage pit at Kostenki 11 (Russia) was dug to what was probably the 
level of frozen ground during warmer months (photograph by author); (B) an excavated 
kiln at Dolní Veˇstonice I (eastern Czech Republic) could fire clay at temperatures of 
about 1,500oF (redrawn from Pamela P. Vandiver et al., “The Origins of Ceramic Tech-
nology at Dolni Veˇstonice, Czechoslovakia,” Science 246 [1989]: 1007, fig. 7a).
A
B

126         the upper paleolithic as history
other major new technologies—for example, the weight-driven clock—the 
production of fired ceramics among the Gravettians seems to have been 
devoted to nonutilitarian purposes, such as making art objects. The practi-
cal uses of this technology did not emerge until the later Upper Paleolithic.
The Gravettians manufactured a profusion of household items and 
gadgets, some of them of unknown function. They made portable lamps, 
fueled with animal fat, out of mammoth bone, and apparently they weaved 
baskets. As in EUP times, they made sewing needles from bone and ivory 
and fashioned small needle cases similar to those of the Inuit. The south-
ern Siberian sites yielded figurines that depict people wearing fur suits, 
complete with snug-fitting hoods, which illustrate this highly complex 
technology for the first time. But the function of many of the carved and 
drilled pieces of bone and ivory in Gravettian sites is unknown; they are 
reminiscent of the items recovered from prehistoric Inuit sites.78
The increased population density in the Gravettian is significant 
because it represents the first discernible growth of the mind or super-
brain. Although the expansion of modern humans out of Africa must 
have greatly increased the total number of individuals who contributed to 
the collective mind, the relative simplicity of EUP technology constrained 
“carrying capacity” and population density, as indicated by the consis-
tently small size of the sites of that period. Day-to-day social interactions 
must have been limited to small groups, supplemented by periodic interac-
tions among groups and individuals within wider networks (maintained 
by marriage and trade). As modern humans dispersed across Eurasia and 
Australia, they would have differentiated into local groups and regional 
networks—with corresponding dialects and languages—which are reflected 
as separate cultures in the archaeological record.
The large gatherings at Gravettian sites would have represented an 
expansion of the individual components of a super-brain in any given area 
or, at the very least, an intensification of interactions and collective think-
ing in a local neocortical network. As a larger gene pool offers a wider 
source of genetic variation, a super-brain composed of more components 
offers a greater potential for innovation and creativity. And as a bigger 
organism provides more room for hierarchically organized specialization 
among its cells and organs, a super-brain with more participants contains 
more potential for specialized thinking—for individuals devoted to specific 
arts or technologies. Although full-time specialists are not thought to have 
emerged until later times, with the advent of much larger settlements, the 
seeds were present in the kiln makers and tenders of the Gravettian.

the upper paleolithic as history        127
The pattern of Gravettian art may illustrate another consequence of 
greater population density and an enlarged collective mind. An increased 
potential for creativity and innovation also brings an increased potential 
for alternative realities in the form of subversion and blasphemy. If it con-
tains the seeds of specialized thought in some of its complex technologies, 
the Gravettian may also yield traces of another phenomenon that emerges 
vividly in later times and among more complex societies: the control of 
thought and behavior through public ritual and other expressions of faith.79 
Childe counted it among the forces—perhaps the most important one—that 
inhibit innovation.80 The often elaborate burials of the Gravettians—such as 
the triple grave at Dolní Vˇestonice II, with its inclusions of ocher, charcoal, 
and various artifacts81—may reflect the intensification of public ritual, but it 
is the mobilary art that suggests a break with the EUP.
The “Venus” figurines of the Gravettian are striking for not only their 
subject matter, but also their ubiquity and geographic spread (figure 4.8).82 
Figure 4.8  The Gravettian “Venus” figurines are the earliest known examples of the use 
of a uniform motif in visual art, although they exhibit some stylistic variation. The pat-
tern might reflect changes in society and politics during this first “industrial revolution.”

128         the upper paleolithic as history
They contrast markedly with the EUP sculptures, which are few and highly 
individualistic. The female figurines may reflect the emergence of a Gra-
vettian worldview, and while its content may forever remain unknown, 
the sameness of the sculptures across a vast expanse suggests widespread 
conformity to the new doctrines. Future discoveries of, say, more Löwen-
menschen at EUP sites may expose the contrast as a sampling problem. But 
at present, a difference between the art of the EUP and that of the Gravet-
tian is apparent, and it could be interpreted as evidence of a conservative 
backlash against the social and economic upheavals that accompanied the 
end of the EUP or simply as a response to the unprecedented cacophony 
of voices that arose with the Gravettian. Perhaps the wave of innovation 
came to a close at this point.
In any case, the Gravettian way of life seems to have ended abruptly 
after 24,000 years ago, and at this point, climate may indeed have been 
the cause. Both on the East European Plain and across southern Sibe-
ria, settlement declined markedly during the Last Glacial Maximum, 
and some stratified sites exhibit an occupation hiatus.83 It is unclear 
why people appear to have abandoned the coldest and driest regions of 
mid-latitude Eurasia at this time. In addition to the extreme cold, food 
and fuel resources probably decreased, and one or more of these vari-
ables may have reached a critical threshold for human settlement. Skel-
etal remains of the Gravettians reveal that they retained in large mea-
sure the anatomical proportions of their EUP ancestors—an essentially  
tropical physique—which may have been a significant liability despite 
their fur clothing.84
The Periglacial Village
The archaeological course toward domestication in the Levant can 
be traced from around 19,000 b.c., at the peak of the last glaciation.
Peter Bellwood
Climates in the Northern Hemisphere ameliorated somewhat after the 
Last Glacial Maximum, but temperatures remained low for several millen-
nia (19,000 to 16,000 years ago). Significantly milder conditions prevailed 
during the Lateglacial Interstadial (15,000 to 13,000 years ago), followed by 
a brief cold interval at the end of the Pleistocene epoch, or Ice Age (which 
terminated after 11,000 years ago). For the first time in more than 100,000 
years, full interglacial climates returned to the Northern Hemisphere.

the upper paleolithic as history        129
There is broad consensus among prehistorians that warming climates 
and their effects on plants and animals after 11,000 years ago were the 
primary cause of settled village life, farming and stockbreeding, and 
eventually urban centers and civilization. I suggest instead that climate 
change had a limited role in the development of villages and cities. A 
more significant factor was the steady accumulation of technological 
knowledge during the critical millennia between 19,000 and 11,000 
years ago. I further suggest that village agriculture would not have devel-
oped anywhere, at least not for many thousands of years, had the Ice 
Age ended 19,000 years ago, before this important phase in the history 
of the mind.
Building on the existing knowledge of the early and middle Upper Paleo-
lithic mind, societies in various parts of the world achieved major break-
throughs and expanded and refined previously known technologies. They 
developed the earliest known mechanical technology, applied their high-
temperature kilns to the production of pottery, and domesticated dogs. 
Many of the new technologies hint at a more settled way of life, and sites 
in a number of regions acquired an increasingly village-like appearance— 
groups of houses with walls of bone in some cases, and paved stone floors 
in others.85 In the Near East, where the oldest known agricultural settle-
ments were discovered long ago, the gradual transition from hunting camps 
to farming villages—accompanied by significant population growth—began 
after the Last Glacial Maximum.86
Gordon Childe described the first artifacts with moving parts as 
“engines,” even though human muscles provided the power source.87 
They constitute a defining difference, nevertheless, between the technol-
ogy of humans and that of all other organisms. The oldest documented 
specimen is a fragmentary spear-thrower from Combe-Saunière I (south-
ern France) that dates to about 20,000 years ago (figure 4.9).88 As the earli-
est known mechanical technology, it is predictably simple and represents 
a classic example of “organ projection” envisioned by the nineteenth-
century philosopher of technology Ernst Kapp,89 by effectively extend-
ing the length of the arm and creating an artificial hand to increase its 
leverage. The bow and arrow appeared much later; wooden arrow shafts 
from Stellmoor (Germany) are dated to no more than 12,000 years ago.90 
While the design of the arrow was a modification of that of earlier pro-
jectiles, the bow was a novel and highly imaginative piece of technology 
without obvious parallels or models in the natural world—its structure 
was generated in the mind. Human muscles still provided the energy, 

130         the upper paleolithic as history
but it was stored in the bow and bowstring by applying knowledge of the 
elastic properties of these materials.
More complex mechanical technology—also powered by stored energy 
supplied by muscles, but without a human present to release it—may be 
manifest in “untended facilities” for trapping small mammals. The harvest-
ing of small mammals can be traced back to the initial phases of the EUP, 
but the technology behind it (perhaps nets and snares) remains unclear. 
Some possible trap components in the form of ivory fragments that were 
planed, beveled, and otherwise worked into various shapes were found at 
Mezhirich (Ukraine) (figure 4.10) dated to roughly 17,000 years ago.91 An 
effective trap reflects knowledge of animal behavior and how to exploit it 
and is a clever device for saving both time and labor. Thomas Hobbes would 
have recognized it as the first example of “artificiall life,”92 designed to func-
tion like a simple organism. Because traps would have been placed away 
from settlements—potentially distributed across the landscape along exten-
sive traplines—they have unusually low archaeological visibility and may have 
been used much more often than an isolated specimen would suggest.
Figure 4.9  The oldest currently known example of mechanical technology is a fragment 
of a spear-thrower (atlatl) from Combe-Saunière I (southern France). (Redrawn from 
Pierre Cattelain, “Un crochet de propulseur solutréen de la grotte de Combe-Saunière 1 
[Dordogne],” Bulletin de la Société préhistorique française 86 [1989]: 214, fig. 2)

the upper paleolithic as history        131
Pottery was long associated with the rise of village farming, but it is 
now apparent that people were producing ceramic vessels in the imme-
diate aftermath of the Last Glacial Maximum. A partially reconstructed 
pot—a wide-mouthed, cone-shaped vessel—from Yuchanyan Cave (south-
ern China) dates to between 18,300 and 15,430 years ago (figure 4.11).93 
The dates are only slightly older than those for the earliest pottery found 
in Japan (roughly 16,000 calibrated radiocarbon years ago) and for late 
Upper Paleolithic pottery in the Amur River Basin (Russian Far East), at 
16,500 to 14,500 years ago.94 Some of the pots from Japan were manufac-
tured with fiber temper and decorated with simple incised or impressed 
Figure 4.10  Several pieces of modified ivory recovered from Mezhirich (Ukraine) have 
been interpreted as trap components. Evidence for the consumption of small mam-
mals and freshwater aquatic foods in earlier sites suggests that traps and snares probably 
date to the EUP. (Drawn by Ian T. Hoffecker, from a photograph in I. G. Pidoplichko, 
Mezhirichskie zhilishcha iz Kostei Mamonta [Kiev: Naukova dumka, 1976], 164, fig. 61)

132         the upper paleolithic as history
designs. Traces of secondary burning and carbonized adhesions indicate 
that many were used for boiling and cooking, while others may have been 
used for storage.95
Domesticated dogs are documented at Eliseevichi I (Russia), in the 
form of skulls with shortened snouts, a diagnostic characteristic that helps 
differentiate them from wolves.96 The skulls are associated with an occu-
pation layer that contains remains of dwelling structures and substantial 
quantities of household debris, dating to roughly 17,000 years ago. More 
recent dogs are reported farther west at Bonn-Oberkassel (Germany).97 
An analysis of mitochondrial DNA among living dogs placed their initial 
domestication in East Asia during the later Upper Paleolithic,98 which is 
not surprising given the hint of protracted settlement provided by the pot-
tery. Dogs represent the first biotechnology—the genetic modification of an 
organism—even if undertaken with little sense of purpose or method.
Another realm of innovation laden with destiny is information technol-
ogy. There is evidence for simple artificial-memory systems, comprising 
Figure 4.11  Reconstructed ceramic vessel from Yuchanyan Cave (southern China). 
(Drawn from a photograph by Ian T. Hoffecker)

the upper paleolithic as history        133
rows of incised marks on pieces of bone, in the EUP. More convincing 
examples have been recovered from Gravettian sites, such as Abri Labuttat 
(France), but the most complex forms, sometimes containing hundreds 
of marks, date to the later Upper Paleolithic and include specimens from 
Laugerie Basse and La Marche (both France) and Tossal de la Roca (Spain) 
(figure 4.12). These pieces reveal groups of marks—for example, short paral-
lel strokes and notches—some which were made with different tools and 
perhaps at different times. A few of the marks on the Laugerie Basse piece 
were partly erased.99 The information recorded, and apparently deleted, 
remains unknown. For decades, Alexander Marshack argued that at least 
some of them represent lunar calendars,100 but others have questioned or 
disputed his conclusion. An alternative explanation is that they record the 
number of prey taken, and it is noteworthy that engraved images of two 
horses are associated with the marks on the La Marche piece.101
If tailored clothing is artificial skin and spear-throwers are elongated 
arms, the notational systems of the Upper Paleolithic are examples of a 
technological extension and enhancement of brain function outside the 
individual cranium. They also illustrate the use of true symbols—the shape 
of the marks presumably having little connection with the items recorded—
in digital rather than iconic form. On some pieces, the marks seem to be 
organized hierarchically, and, in my view, they provide the strongest indi-
rect evidence for the presence of syntactic language.
Perhaps the best evidence for increasingly sedentary life during the later 
Upper Paleolithic is offered by the former settlements themselves. If Yuch-
anyan Cave and other sites in East Asia that have yielded fragments of pot-
tery are regarded as precursors to the village life of the post-Paleolithic era, 
large open sites in other regions contain the remains of village-like groups 
of semipermanent dwellings. The most widely known are the mammoth-
bone houses of the East European Plain (figure 4.13A). In a landscape 
devoid of trees, the houses were constructed from the bones and tusks 
of woolly mammoth. Most are round or oval in plan and several yards in 
diameter. Former hearths (filled with bone ash) are located in the interior 
of each residence, along with a mass of household debris. Deep storage 
pits were dug around the houses, possibly for cold storage of bone or food 
during the warmer months. Traces of no fewer than four mammoth-bone 
structures have been found at Mezhirich and Dobranichevka (Ukraine) 
and  Yudinovo (Russia) (figure 4.13B).102
Rather permanent-looking former dwellings also are known from late 
Upper Paleolithic open-air settlements in western Europe. In southwestern 

Figure 4.12  Information technology in the form of artificial memory systems (AMS) 
dates to the earlier phases of the Upper Paleolithic, but became increasingly complex dur-
ing the later phases. Each face of this antler from La Marche shelter (France) is engraved 
with a series of marks interpreted by Francesco d’Errico as groups of signs. (From Fran-
cesco d’Errico et al., “Archaeological Evidence for the Emergence of Language, Symbol-
ism, and Music—An Alternative Multidisciplinary Perspective,” Journal of World Prehistory 
17 [2003]: 34, fig. 8[f]. Reprinted with the permission of Springer Science and Business 
Media)

Figure 4.13  The foundations of village life: (A) ruins of a mammoth-bone house at 
Kostenki 11 (Russia) (photo by author); (B) floor plan of Dobranichevka (Ukraine), 
showing several former mammoth-bone structures (modified from I. G. Shovkoplyas, 
“Dobranichevskaya Stoyanka na Kievshchine,” Materialy i Issledovaniya po Arkheologii SSSR 
185 [1972]: 178, fig. 1).
A
B

Figure 4.14  The imposition of geometric form on the landscape is evident in the paved 
house floor at Le Cerisier (France), a nearly perfect square with entrances to the east and 
west. (After James R. Sackett, “The Neuvic Group: Upper Paleolithic Open-Air Sites 
in the Perigord,” in Upper Pleistocene Prehistory of Western Eurasia, ed. Harold L. Dibble 
and Anna Montet-White [Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Museum, 1988], 
69, fig. 3.5. Reproduced with permission from The University Museum, University of 
Pennsylvania)

the upper paleolithic as history        137
France, sites along the Isle River contain pavements of stone that appar-
ently reflect the shape of former structures. At Plateau Parrain, the pave-
ment measures 16 × 18 feet in plan and seems to indicate an entrance on 
the south side. At Le Cerisier, the cobble flooring measures roughly 16 × 
16 feet, creating a perfect square with opposing entrances on the east and 
west sides (figure 4.14).103
The house floors in the Isle River sites illustrate a pattern that becomes 
increasingly obvious and even somewhat oppressive in the millennia fol-
lowing the end of the Paleolithic—the imposition of geometric forms on 
the landscape.104 Rectangles, squares, pyramids, and even the true, or 
Euclidian, circle are unknown in the natural world—biotic or abiotic.105 
Evolutionary biology yields symmetrical forms, but not geometric shapes 
(organisms tend to be lumpy and uneven). Simple geometric shapes are 
creations of the modern mind. From the late Upper Paleolithic onward, 
modern humans began to reconstruct the natural landscape in accordance 
with these mental creations, remaking the world in the form of the mind. 
So pervasive is the contemporary landscape of this externalized geometry 
that most of the global population now dwells largely within its own mind.
Geometry is a common theme in later Upper Paleolithic art. Although 
some of most impressive examples of representational art—both cave paint-
ings and sculptures—date to after 20,000 years ago, abstract designs and 
geometric forms predominate in places like central and eastern Europe.106 
The meanings attached to the visual art of the later Upper Paleolithic 
remain unknowable, but the change in content and style from the EUP 
and the Gravettian is undeniable and suggests a shift in worldview. Later 
Upper Paleolithic people had acquired considerably more knowledge of 
and greater control over the external world than their predecessors, which 
surely was reflected in how they interpreted it. Perhaps they felt that they 
lived in a more orderly and manageable universe than had their ancestors. 
If so, they were indeed laying the foundation for the post-Paleolithic civi-
lizations that would obsessively reconstruct that universe with numbers.

5
Mindscapes of the Postglacial Epoch
[T]he [urban] revolution seems to mark,  
not the dawn of a new era of accelerated advance,  
but the culmination and arrest of  
an earlier period of growth.
V. Gordon Childe
The Upper Paleolithic was a time of more or less steady innovation 
and growth of knowledge. Although the uncertainties of discovery and 
dating in this range make it difficult to identify intervals when the pace 
of innovation may have slowed or halted altogether, the archaeologi-
cal record yields a long succession of novelties from fur hoods to fish-
hooks and boats to baking ovens. The cumulative effect of these inven-
tions was to redesign humans in a variety of ways, in accordance with 
the collective mind. Their practical impact from a biological standpoint 
was to allow one species—of recent tropical origin—to colonize most ter-
restrial habitats on the planet and to expand the size and density of  
some populations.
The development of the super-brain, which multiplied and spread with 
modern human foraging groups, also had brought forth a new phenom-
enon that operated above the level of the brain of an individual organ-
ism. The evolution of language and other forms of symbolic communica-
tion had allowed the members of each group to integrate their brains, 
significantly increasing the computational and recursive power of human 
thought. Moreover, by communicating thought from one generation to 
the next through oral tradition and artifacts, the collective mind had 
escaped the narrow confines of biological time and acquired a potentially 

mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        139
unlimited “life span” of its own. Each collective mind had accumulated 
knowledge over the course of many Upper Paleolithic generations.
The growth in population and settlement size was a consequence of 
the redesigned human, who controlled an increasingly large and diverse 
supply of food and energy through technology. In the later Upper Paleo-
lithic, modern humans in several parts of the world began to move away 
from their ancient mammalian foraging ecology to a sedentary economy 
based on domesticated plants and animals. The super-brain created an 
alternative ecological niche for the human organism—a niche subject to 
continual change and expansion that allowed for potentially unlimited 
growth. And with the emergence of large populations and sedentary com-
munities, humans began to redesign the landscape as well as themselves.
During the Upper Paleolithic, efforts to refashion the landscape had 
been largely confined to the microhabitat represented by an artificial shel-
ter or a house or by a corral or fish weir.1 The domestication of dogs may be 
regarded as a modest and unintentional move to reshape a small piece of 
the biotic environment. But with the appearance of farming villages and the 
eventual spread of towns and cities, people began to transform meadows 
into crop rows and streams into linear canals. They constructed rectangu-
lar buildings, laid out orthogonal street grids, and designed geometrically 
complex plazas and palaces. These created landscapes had no precedent 
on Earth; they reflected neither the processes of geomorphology nor the 
evolved patterns of organic life, but the peculiar forms of the mind.2
As local populations grew to massive size—to thousands of individuals— 
people began to redesign their societies in equally strange ways. Forms 
generated in the collective mind were imposed on the evolved organic pat-
terns of age, gender, and biological kinship. People came to be classified 
in accordance with created social and economic roles, such as stonecutter, 
potter, blacksmith, accountant, priest, slave, and king. This hierarchical 
specialization of thought and action apparently was essential to the func-
tioning of the civilizations that arose from towns and cities in the Near 
East, China, Mexico, and other places in the postglacial epoch.
Although hierarchical social organization seems to have developed, at 
least in some places, without violence or armed coercion, warfare inevita-
bly accompanied the early civilizations. More often than not, they faced 
real or perceived external threats that required a specialized hierarchy 
in the form of an army. Most early civilizations eventually expanded by 
forcibly incorporating cities and towns into a larger political entity. As 
a consequence, they also faced internal threats—uprisings, civil war, and 

140         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
disintegration into smaller units. Under these conditions, novel ideas and 
alternative realities often were categorized as dangerous and subversive, 
and the creative powers of the mind were suppressed.
The pace of technological innovation slowed in most early civilizations 
and sometimes ceased altogether, even though the total number of brains 
integrated into the collective mind of each state had increased exponen-
tially. Moreover, many brains were devoted to specialized areas of thought 
and activity, and new means for their integration in both space and time 
had been created, especially writing. For reasons that remain obscure, west-
ern Europe broke out of the pattern of stasis after 1200, and the result was 
the modern world—in terms of both the advance of technology and the 
construction of reality.
The Civilized Mind
Ideology emerges with the state: a body of thought to complement a 
political entity.
Barry J. Kemp
After more than seventy-five years of research and debate, the social and 
economic revolutions in human prehistory conceived by V. Gordon Childe 
remain key concepts in archaeology.3 The first of them—the development 
of sedentary farming communities during the Neolithic—now seems less 
of a revolution and more of a gradual development from mobile foraging 
to controlled harvesting of plants and animals through cumulative techno-
logical creativity. The roots of the Neolithic extend back 20,000 years to 
the Last Glacial Maximum, if not earlier. The Urban Revolution—the birth 
of civilization—though, retains its explosive character.
Lewis Mumford labeled the early civilizations mega-machines and likened 
them to massive mechanical devices “composed solely of human parts.”4 
They were, in many respects, experiments in social technology that reflected 
an inability to understand, or perhaps an unwillingness to acknowledge, 
the properties of the raw materials from which they were constructed. 
Many of the human parts of the machine probably were unhappy with 
their roles. Above all, civilization reflected the trauma of forcing nation-
state organization onto a social order that was still defined primarily by 
family relationships.5 Ideology was substituted for blood ties and marriage 
alliances. Inevitably, perhaps, the governments of the newly formed civiliza-
tions identified themselves with the forces that control the universe.

mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        141
Civilization seems to represent a threshold in the density of the popula-
tion or the size of the super-brain, at which the latter undergoes reorga-
nization. There are, it would appear, simply too many individual brains 
and voices and insufficient communication and integration among them.6 
The size of the threshold is not entirely clear, but it numbers in the thou-
sands at a minimum. Each of the cities that were hammered together to 
form a state in ancient China probably had several thousand inhabitants, 
and similar numbers are estimated for the urban centers that became the 
Maya civilization. But some of the latter, as well as some of the Sumerian 
cities that became city-states before being consolidated into a wider politi-
cal organization, seem to have been larger.7 And some sedentary societies 
that never morphed into nation-states, even though exhibiting elements of 
hierarchical organization, comprised many thousands of people.8
The reorganized super-brain became the nation-state. It exhibited a pre-
dictable hierarchical structure, with centralized political authority and a 
large organization of administrative assistants, priests, technicians, work-
ers, and slaves, whose roles and relationships were at least partly defined 
by ideology. According to the Egyptologist Barry Kemp: “Fundamental 
to the state is an idealized image of itself, an ideology, a unique identity. 
It sets itself goals and pursues them by projecting irresistible images of 
power. These aide the mobilization of the resources and energies of the 
people, characteristically achieved by bureaucracy. We can speak of it as 
an organism because although made by man it takes on a life of its own.”9 
The early civilizations also exhibited a pattern of specialization in thought 
and activity among their individual components. Even the simplest state 
organization contained craft specialists, such as potters, metallurgists, 
engineers, and scribes.
In order to function as an integrated whole, the national mind gener-
ated systems of writing, along with systems of weights and measures and of 
coinage. These were newly created internal components of the reorganized 
super-brain, analogous to spoken language and visual art in Upper Paleo-
lithic times.10 The earlier forms of communication and record keeping 
were apparently insufficient to integrate and manage such large organiza-
tions. Civilizations have continued to develop new means of management 
and integration, such as clocks, newspapers, radio, and the Internet.
Monumental architecture in the form of public buildings and plazas 
was another seemingly inevitable manifestation of civilization. Although 
typically regarded as the primary technical achievement of the early nation-
states, the massive public structures also were a form of communication 

142         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
analogous to art and language in many ways. They were powerful symbols 
of the political and religious ideology of the state. And they were typically 
used as the setting for major public ceremonies or rituals.11
The social hierarchy of the early civilizations is so similar to that of 
the eusocial insects, especially the ants, that many of the same categories, 
such as worker and soldier, can be applied to both types of societies. The 
reorganized super-brain that represents the nation-state exhibits closer par-
allels to the super-organism than did its Upper Paleolithic and Neolithic 
predecessors. A fundamental difference remains, however, between the 
two entities. Ant societies build massive complexes of chambers and pas-
sageways, but they have no need for monumental architecture and public 
rituals. Such efforts would be a waste of time, energy, and resources. The 
reproductive biology of the eusocial insects has allowed them to generate 
state-like organization within the context of the family, so there is no con-
flict between king and clan.12
The slowing pace of innovation in the early civilizations—especially after 
what seems to have been an extraordinary surge of invention in the period 
leading up to, and perhaps immediately following, the formation of these 
societies—suggests that the newly reorganized super-brain was not very cre-
ative. The perceived lack of innovation in nation-states before the end of 
the Middle Ages in Europe has been a recurrent topic of debate among 
historians of technology.13 After what Robert McC. Adams described as “a 
brief creative burst” and “extraordinary technological advances” associated 
with the rise of urban centers, inventions almost completely ceased in the 
ancient Near East.14 The pattern is less evident during late antiquity in 
Hellenistic Greece and imperial Rome, and especially in China (before the 
Ming dynasty), but even in these settings there is a contrast with develop-
ments in western Europe after 1250.15
Both the organization and the ideology of the early nation-states prob-
ably discouraged novel thinking. Self-appointed governments are threat-
ened by alternative realities, and the creative powers of individual brains 
would have been a potential source of instability in these hierarchical sys-
tems.16 Moreover, the people at the top of these newly formed hierarchies 
had acquired the means to suppress alternative thinking—at least when 
externalized by speech or action—through the apparatus of the state. And 
they promoted the notion that they were connected to the controlling 
forces of the universe, either representing the divine or at least possess-
ing special abilities (applied astronomy or other methods of divination) to 
interpret the direction of those forces correctly.

mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        143
A major consequence of civilization was a slowing—and, in some cases, 
even an arresting—of the growth of the collective mind with respect to the 
accumulation of knowledge and the increased ability to manipulate the 
external world. The growth of the mind is dependent on creativity and nov-
elty—applied to both technology and explanation. The narrow hierarchical 
structure of the early nation-states seems to have discouraged or suppressed 
much of it because the increased potential for creativity represented by a 
larger and more diverse population was more of a threat than an asset. 
The reorganized super-brain represented by the early civilizations was less 
capable of generating alternative realities than were its predecessors, and, 
for the most part, reality was stabilized for several thousand years.
An Alternative Landscape
[H]umans have been engaged in creating a living and working place, a 
human-built world, ever since their ouster from the Garden of Eden.
Thomas P. Hughes
The Near East is the region where both sedentary farming communities 
and early civilizations first developed. The consensus among archaeolo-
gists is that the reason lies in its high biological productivity—enhanced by 
changing weather patterns at the end of the glacial epoch—and its mosaic 
of diverse local habitats, which supported a number of potential plant 
and animal domesticates. As Upper Paleolithic foraging groups expanded 
their control over this rich environment 20,000 to 15,000 years ago, their 
numbers increased with particular vigor.
The well-known Fertile Crescent—which stretches from the Jordan Val-
ley north and east across Anatolia and then bends southeast toward the 
Persian Gulf (figure 5.1)—supported open woodland and grassland inhab-
ited by various wild cereals (wheat, barley, and rye) and legumes (beans, 
peas, and lentils). Wild sheep and goats dwelt in the uplands. As today, 
there was significant altitudinal variation in local environments. After 
17,000 years ago, temperature and moisture began to rise.17
The broad-based high-tech foraging economy that long preceded the 
farming villages of the Fertile Crescent is illustrated by an Upper Paleo-
lithic settlement on the Sea of Galilee. Ohalo II (Israel) was occupied 
immediately after the peak cold and aridity of the Last Glacial Maximum, 
roughly 20,000 years ago. An unusual drop in water level two decades 
ago exposed traces of brush huts with stone flooring and other remains 

144         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
that had been exceptionally well preserved in the waterlogged sediment. 
Plant foods consumed at the site included more than thirty species, among 
which were wild emmer wheat and barley. Other plants apparently were 
used for medicinal purposes. Gazelles, birds, fish, and mollusks were repre-
sented among the animals. Technologies for preparing food included mor-
tars, pestles, and an arrangement of stones that may have been a simple 
baking oven.18
People in the region continued to pursue a mobile foraging economy 
as the climate became warmer and wetter after 17,000 years ago. During 
this phase, groups expanded into areas of former desert. After 14,000 years 
ago, more stable settlements appeared. They include sites assigned to the 
Natufian culture, such as Ain Mallaha (Israel) and contemporaneous occu-
pations at sites like Abu Hureyra (Syria). Many Natufian settlements are 
substantially larger than earlier sites and contain traces of circular semi-
subterranean dwellings with stone foundations. The process of innovation 
continued, as Ofer Bar-Yosef observed: “The technological innovations 
introduced by the Natufians, such as sickles, picks, and improved tools 
for archery, were added to an already existing Upper Paleolithic inventory 
of utensils that included simple bows, corded fibers, and food processing 
Figure 5.1  Map of the Fertile Crescent region, showing the location of sites mentioned 
in the text.

mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        145
tools such as mortars and pestles.”19 Although storage facilities are not 
especially common—Ain Mallaha contains some likely examples—burials 
are quite numerous in comparison with those of the preceding era, sug-
gesting a more sedentary lifestyle. Also indicative of sedentism are house-
hold trash heaps containing the remains of mice.20
It appears that settled communities preceded, and in some respects trig-
gered, agriculture, and not the reverse. Traces of domesticated plants do 
not show up in the Levant until after a sedentary economy was already in 
place. The cooler and drier climates of the Younger Dryas period (roughly 
12,800 to 11,300 years ago) may have provided the catalyst. The expand-
ing Natufian population probably experienced severe stress as the resource 
base contracted during this period. The cultivation of cereals like einkorn 
and rye seems to have been a response, and there is evidence for small-
scale agriculture at sites on the margin of the retreating forest zone like 
Abu Hureyra. As conditions worsened, Abu Hureyra was abandoned alto-
gether. It was reoccupied, however, at the end of the Younger Dryas by a 
larger community—a true farming village.21
Experimental research indicates that the process of domestication—
altering the genetic structure of plants and animals through artificial  
selection—could have taken place in twenty to thirty years with some wild 
cereal species.22 The intensification of harvesting and replanting as con-
ditions deteriorated during the Younger Dryas may have accelerated the 
selection of desired phenotypes. Instead of adapting themselves to a chang-
ing environment, villagers at the western end of the Fertile Crescent were 
redesigning the environment—creating an alternative landscape. The con-
sequences of domestication for human population biology were immense 
because the altered landscape could support more people per unit area. 
A larger population density would provide both the need and the means 
for further alterations; potential growth would be limited only by the total 
resources of the planet.
By 9,000 years ago, agricultural settlements like ‘Ain Ghazal (Jordan) 
occupied more than 25 acres and contained multiroom and even mul-
tistory houses (figure 5.2). The dwellings exhibit a shift from the earlier 
circular form to the rectilinear shape that continues to dominate the 
mindscape. Grain-storage facilities and public structures—shrines and, 
eventually, temples—also were present in these sites. The population of 
‘Ain Ghazal is estimated at 2,500 to 3,000 people by 8,000 years ago. Both 
the domestication of sheep and goats and the production of pottery took 
place at this time.23

146         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
At this point, if not before, farmers colonized the eastern terminus 
of the Fertile Crescent, establishing villages in southern Mesopotamia. 
Although drier than the Levant, the alluvial lowlands near the Persian 
Gulf are especially suited to irrigation due to the configuration of natu-
ral watercourses and the overall topographic setting. Between 7,800 and 
5,800 years ago, the local population constructed and managed a growing 
network of irrigation canals. As the area of irrigated cropland expanded, 
the population and villages grew in size. Large-scale irrigation was another 
important step in redesigning the environment that had substantial con-
sequences for the human population. It entailed significant alterations to 
the physical landscape, not simply to its plant and animal inhabitants, and 
expanded human knowledge in a new realm: hydrology and water engi-
neering. Moreover, the larger canals eventually acquired another highly 
important function—facilitating transport and trade among the growing 
network of communities in the Mesopotamian alluvium (figure 5.3).24
The world’s first cities emerged from the rapidly growing population cen-
ters of the Fertile Crescent. The rate of growth was exponential. The town 
of Uruk on the Euphrates River in modern Iraq occupied an estimated 
Figure 5.2  The settlement of ‘Ain Ghazal (Jordan) occupied more than 25 acres by 9,000 
years ago, comprising multiroom and multistory houses. (Drawn by Ian T. Hoffecker 
from a photograph by Y. Zo’bi)

Figure 5.3  Landscape of the mind: as the size of the super-brain increased, internal con-
nections—analogous to those of the neocortex in an individual brain—developed in the 
form of roadway and canal systems in southern Mesopotamia. Ur III-Isin-Larsa–period 
settlement patterns are shown here. (From Robert McC. Adams, Heartland of Cities: Sur-
veys of Ancient Settlement and Land Use on the Central Floodplain of the Euphrates [Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1981], 162, fig. 31)

148         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
175 acres by 5,800 years ago. It was more than five times the size that ‘Ain 
Ghazal had been roughly 2,000 years earlier. Within 600 to 800 years, Uruk 
had grown to approximately 620 acres and contained a population esti-
mated at between 25,000 and 50,000. By 4,900 to 4,800 years ago, the city 
had exploded in size to almost 1,480 acres.25 The interactions within and 
among the growing cities of southern Mesopotamia—not only trade and 
alliance, but also competition and military conflict—became increasingly 
intense. Uruk and other cities were surrounded by defensive walls.
By 5,100 years ago (3100 b.c.e.), the cities had organized themselves into a 
social and economic hierarchy: the civilization of Sumer.26 As during the ear-
lier transition from a foraging to an agricultural economy, population stress 
induced by climate change may have been a catalyst. Drier climates prevailed 
after 5,800 years ago, and conditions became even cooler and drier around 
5,200 to 5,100 years ago. A decline in food production and the abandon-
ment of the most arid areas is widely thought to have created a mass of 
refugees and a potential pool of cheap dependent labor.27 At the same time, 
the organizational demands of an increasingly complex society and economy 
seem to have spawned a class of administrators and record keepers, while 
armies demanded commanders and foot soldiers. And at the bottom of the 
hierarchy were a growing number of slaves, generated by military conquest.28
Major technological innovations accompanied the emergence of Sume-
rian civilization. The most notable were writing and mathematics, which 
seem to have evolved from the digital notational systems of the Upper 
Paleolithic. A significant breakthrough—analogous to Gutenberg’s inven-
tion of movable type—was the development of numerical notation tablets 
around 5,400 to 5,300 years ago. Pictographic writing appears in southern 
Mesopotamian sites 5,200 to 5,100 years ago (figure 5.4).29 Analysis of writ-
ten texts reveals that the new information technology was used primarily 
for accounting and record keeping.
Writing and numerical systems seem to be essential to the nation-state, 
which is simply too large and complex to function without them, and 
therefore critical to the reorganization of the super-brain that coincided 
with their development. More broadly, writing and mathematics altered 
the collective mind in a fundamental way. The simple notational systems 
of the Upper Paleolithic represented an externalization of brain function 
on a very small scale. With the invention and widespread application of 
writing, a rapidly expanding corpus of memory was moved outside individ-
ual brains and into various technological forms of storage. Most of human 
memory now resides in these external components of the super-brain.

mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        149
By externalizing memory and creating a system of visual–linguistic 
feedback—analogous to the sensory feedback of artifact manufacture 
that began in the Lower Paleolithic—writing altered the process of think-
ing. The growing archive of memory and thought came to be accessible 
across increasingly large expanses of space and time. The super-brain 
had existed outside the lives of individuals in oral tradition and the 
corpus of information stored in artifacts (primarily in analogical form). 
Now it assumed a significantly greater presence as external representa-
tions were stored and manipulated in digital form. And as people began 
to discover the properties of numbers and apply them to calculations 
rather than simple counting, mathematics also changed the process  
of thinking.
The adoption of domesticated animals for agriculture and transpor-
tation was a major technological advance that preceded and probably 
accelerated the rise of cities and nation-states. Domesticated oxen were 
used to pull plows, ultimately derived from the Upper Paleolithic digging 
stick, for crop production, while domesticated donkeys were employed 
as pack animals. Both innovations were in place before 5,000 years ago. 
Figure 5.4  The hand was finally employed to create symbols in digital form, as does 
the vocal tract, with the invention of writing and mathematics, as illustrated by a Sume-
rian pictograph tablet from the settlement of Kish, dating to more than 5,000 years ago. 
(Drawn by Ian T. Hoffecker, from a photograph in Glyn Daniel, The First Civilizations: 
The Archaeology of Their Origins [New York: Crowell, 1968], 51, fig. 4)

150         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
They represented the first use of an energy source other than human mus-
cle power. Donkeys are credited with intensifying interaction among the 
Mesopotamian cities by facilitating trade and communication. Another 
harnessed source of energy probably was wind power: there is evidence 
for the presence of sail boats that—along with barges hauled by people 
or oxen—were used to move large quantities of goods along the network  
of waterways.30
The Sumerians traditionally are credited, of course, with the invention 
of the wheel. The key innovation actually is the wheeled vehicle, which 
is relatively complicated and was subject to many later refinements, such 
as the revolving front axle.31 Wheels were shaped from solid wood and 
attached to heavy four-wheeled wagons, usually drawn by oxen, as well as 
two-wheeled carts. Powered vehicles are tied to the expanding trade and 
communication networks among cities and towns, but they also had mili-
tary applications. Like the Upper Paleolithic bow, wheeled vehicles were 
not modeled on or inspired by any observable natural phenomena. They 
were an ingenious creation of the mind that yielded almost immediate and 
highly practical benefits.32
Both raw materials and artifacts became commodities in Sumer, and 
written texts document the production and transport of a variety of items. 
This development was related to a fundamental change in the way people 
made things, which reflected the hierarchical social and economic struc-
ture. Between 8,000 and 7,000 years ago, Mesopotamian pottery vessels 
became increasingly standardized: “mass-produced” on revolving pottery 
wheels.33 Textiles also were woven on a titanic scale by 5,000 years ago 
in Uruk and other major cities. Thousands of workers, typically depen-
dent women and children, manufactured woolen textiles in state-owned 
workshops reminiscent of a Charles Dickens novel. Cloth was woven on 
horizontal and vertical looms and then treated with an alkaline solution 
in large vats.34
For many archaeologists and historians, monumental architecture rep-
resents the most impressive technical achievement of the early civiliza-
tions. This view may be influenced by the psychological effect that these 
structures still possess, despite their weathered familiarity and the long 
absence of the formidable political entities they once symbolized.35 The 
shrines that had been constructed in south Mesopotamian villages were 
expanded into large temple complexes—often associated with staged tow-
ers, or ziggurats—in Sumerian cities. A major temple in the city of Ur was 
described by Samuel Noah Kramer:

mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        151
[It] consisted of an enclosure measuring about 400 × 200 yards which 
contained the ziggurat as well as a large number of shrines, storehouses, 
magazines, courtyards, and dwelling places for the temple personnel. The 
ziggurat, the outstanding feature, was a rectangular tower whose base was 
some 200 feet in length and 150 feet in width; its original height was 
about 70 feet. The whole was a solid mass of brickwork with a cover of 
crude mud bricks and an outer layer of burnt bricks set in bitumen. It rose 
in three irregular stages and was approached by three stairways consisting 
of a hundred steps each.36
The temple complexes were the locus of regularly scheduled public 
ceremonies.
Although the Sumerian temples and ziggurats were the first known 
monumental buildings, it was the Old Kingdom of Egypt that designed 
and built the most awesome structures among the early civilizations—in 
terms of both scale and precision. The Great Pyramid at Giza, which was 
constructed during the reign of Cheops in the Fourth Dynasty (2600–2450 
b.c.e.), is the supreme example. Assembled from roughly 2.3 million stone 
blocks (averaging 2.5 tons apiece), the base rests on a nearly perfectly level 
platform that occupies 13.1 acres. Each side originally measured between 
755.43 and 756.08 feet in length (that is, varying by no more than 7.9 
inches, or 0.01 percent). The four corners were almost perfect right angles 
(less than 1o deviation), and the entire structure was aligned almost exactly 
with true north.37
The Great Pyramid and other monumental buildings of the ancient 
civilizations were an early example of the application of mathematics to 
technology. The Sumerian irrigation systems—reportedly laid out with 
the help of levels and measuring rods—were another. The applications 
extended beyond simple arithmetic to geometry. It was a profound devel-
opment with far-reaching consequences—virtually all of modern industrial 
technology is produced with mathematical applications—and a defining 
difference with earlier technology. In part, it reflected practical require-
ments imposed by the scale of monumental structures and other public 
works such as roads and canals. The parallel applications of writing and 
arithmetic to record keeping and accounting addressed analogous require-
ments of scale in the national economy. They also reflected a more precise 
rendering of the mindscape.
Mathematics was applied to time as well as space, and it represented a new 
way of perceiving and interpreting the universe. All the early civilizations  

152         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
designed long-term calendars, which organized time hierarchically into 
numerical units. The Sumerian calendar subdivided the year into twelve 
lunar months and required the periodic insertion of an intercalary month 
to adjust for the imprecise synchronization of the solar and lunar cycles. 
The day was subdivided into hours, which could be measured with a water 
clock. The Egyptians developed several unsynchronized calendars that cov-
ered annual cycles of flooding of the Nile River, as well as lunar and stellar 
cycles, but they also devised a civil calendar of twelve 30-day months and 5 
extra days, for a total of 365 days. The day was subdivided into twenty-four 
hours, but the length of the hours varied according to season.38
Agriculture and nation-states emerged in several other parts of the world 
after the appearance of Sumerian civilization 5,100 years ago. Each civiliza-
tion was unique and reflected both local environmental conditions and 
historical factors, but all of them exhibited a general pattern of hierarchical 
social organization and economic specialization—as well as new information 
technologies for the integration and management of its components—that 
may be explained as a common response to very large densities of people.
Egyptian civilization materialized shortly after the appearance of the 
Sumerian state, but as the result of a somewhat different process. The 
autonomous city-states of southern Mesopotamia never developed in the 
Nile Valley, and political integration was achieved through military uni-
fication of the northern and southern regions: Lower and Upper Egypt, 
respectively. The notion of the kingdom as “two lands” remained ever 
after. Egyptian civilization nevertheless produced most of the features 
found in Sumer.39
A nation-state did not arise in China until roughly 4,000 years ago: a 
full millennium after the appearance of Sumer. The roots of sedentary 
settlement and farming in East Asia are deep, however, extending back to 
the making of pottery and harvesting of potential plant domesticates in 
the aftermath of the Last Glacial Maximum. Settled communities based 
partly on agriculture and similar to those in the Near East about 9,000 
years ago were present in northern China by 8,000 years ago. During the 
next few millennia, the population continued to grow, and by 4,000 years 
ago northern China was filled with walled towns, each inhabited by sev-
eral thousand people under the control of a local clan. Many of them 
were brought under the aegis of the first ruling dynasty (Xia) to create a 
nation-state. It exhibited most of the features of Sumerian and Egyptian  
civilization—with the notable exception of monumental architecture, 
which was present but in subdued form.40

mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        153
Civilization arose much later in the Americas. One reason for the delay 
may have been the absence of a lengthy development of a broad-based 
high-tech economy during the later Upper Paleolithic that produced 
semi-sedentary settlements before the beginning of the postglacial epoch. 
Such a pattern of development is now evident in both the Near East 
(including the Nile Valley) and China. Modern humans do not seem to 
have reached the Western Hemisphere until relatively late (about 15,000 
years ago), and the American contemporaries of the Natufians appear to 
have been mobile foragers with a relatively simple technology. Farming 
villages were present in parts of Central America by 3,800 years ago, and 
complex societies with elaborate tombs and monumental art emerged a 
few centuries later.41
Civilization on a scale commensurate with that in Egypt or China did 
not appear in Mesoamerica until 2,300 years ago with the late Preclassic 
Maya, who developed writing, monumental architecture, and a calendar. 
The Maya comprised a large and dense population; the city of Tik’al is 
thought to have been inhabited by as many as 90,000 people in the Late 
Classic period.42 Tik’al and other cities contained massive temple com-
plexes and pyramids that are remarkably similar to those of the early civi-
lizations in the Near East, although they undoubtedly reflect independent 
invention. By 600, civilization also had emerged in South America. The 
Andean states are distinguished from others by the absence of writing, 
although accounting and record keeping were performed with a system of 
knotted cords (quipu).43
All the complex societies that developed in the postglacial epoch rede-
signed their environmental settings in various ways. This began with 
the reorganization of plant and animal communities into gardens, crop 
fields, herds, and livestock pens. In many places, people created artificial 
waterways (canals), springs (wells), and ponds (reservoirs). But the most 
bizarre manifestations of this pattern were the created social environments 
of urban centers. Beginning with villages and towns, people built recti-
linear houses with rectangular windows and doorways. The cities often 
contained orthogonal avenues and causeways, as well as large public build-
ings and plazas that were pure creations of the collective mind—geometric 
forms that bore little resemblance to features in a natural landscape. In 
some places, their immense size and the time and labor invested in their 
construction, reached the level of the absurd. They seem to have served 
no useful function from the perspective of human biology; the public cer-
emonies held at the temple complexes at Ur, Giza, or Tik’al could have 

154         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
been performed in an open field. Rather, they were symbols of the equally 
immense political structures that now dwelt on the Earth.
An Age of Stone
[A]ll knowledge of mind is historical.
R. G. Collingwood
R. G. Collingwood observed that the early civilizations had no concept of 
history. The “habit of thinking historically,” he argued, was a surprisingly 
recent phenomenon, dating no earlier than the eighteenth century.44 The 
first nation-states instead saw themselves through the prism of myth, or 
what Collingwood labeled “theocratic history.” In both cases, past events 
were explained by the actions of supernatural beings.
The absence of a historical perspective in the early civilizations seems to 
reflect a cultural construction of time that was cyclical, rather than linear. 
It was a perspective both common and logical; time was perceived as a 
phenomenon that revolved continuously, as do the days, lunar months, 
and seasons. Such a perspective does not preclude history, but it does not 
demand or even imply it in the same way as does a linear concept of time. 
The modern linear construction of time, which has its own theological 
basis, developed in late antiquity.45 Unlike a historical narrative composed 
of an irreversible sequence of past events, a myth—as Claude Lévi-Strauss 
wrote—”explains the present and the past as well as the future”46 and is, as 
he famously suggested, an instrument “for the obliteration of time.”47
A preference for myth over history also reflects an aversion to change 
and would seem to be another manifestation of the reactionary and repres-
sive character of the early civilizations—or, at least, their consistent fail-
ure to cultivate new ideas. By doing so, they slowed and, at times, almost 
stopped the process of history, especially if we define it in Collingwood’s 
words as “the history of thought.” The few available fragments of historical 
narrative provided by the early nation-states are largely confined to lists of 
kings and accounts of battles or natural catastrophes. There was no sense 
of progress toward a better world—a view that pervades modern life.48
Among the early civilizations, Egypt was the most successful in sup-
pressing change and obliterating time. Despite major disruptions—which 
included the collapse of the Old Kingdom, foreign invasion and occupa-
tion, and a deeply disturbing challenge to religious doctrines (Akhenaten’s 
monotheistic “counter-religion” in 1352 b.c.e.)—the culture of ancient 

mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        155
Egypt endured with minimal alteration for almost 3,000 years. The Egyp-
tians steadfastly protected their traditional worldview—and the forms of 
language, art, and ritual through which it was expressed—from internal 
subversion and foreign contamination. As Jan Assmann observed, an edu-
cated Egyptian of the Roman period could have read and understood a 
Third Dynasty tomb inscription composed more than two and half millen-
nia earlier. The longevity of Egyptian culture is without parallel and can be 
regarded not as a deficiency, but “rather as a special cultural achievement— 
indeed, one perhaps unique.”49
The familiar pattern of Egyptian ideology and art arose during the 
Early Dynastic Period and the Old Kingdom (3100–2150 b.c.e.). The con-
struction in the early Third Dynasty of Djoser’s step pyramid (figure 5.5), 
which monumentalized the politically important sed festival, seems to have 
marked a critical turning point.50 But the earlier creation of hieroglyphic 
writing, which allowed the preservation of sacred texts, also was signifi-
cant. The Egyptians insisted on repetition of the precise wording of these 
texts in ritual settings. This reflected a belief that the proper functioning 
of the universe could be ensured only by careful adherence to the form of 
the sacred.51
Ancient Egypt was a paradox. It became the most extreme example of 
conservatism among nation-states, but only after having become one of 
most revolutionary societies in history. More than any other early civi-
lization, post-unification Egypt seems to have attempted a rapid replace-
ment of the traditional organization of clans and villages with the idea of 
the nation. The government of the Old Kingdom implemented a social 
Figure 5.5  The construction of Djoser’s step pyramid within an enclosure during the 
Third Dynasty in Egypt linked the sed festival, which celebrated the continued rule of a 
pharaoh, to monumental architecture and seems to have played a role in the emergence 
of a nation-state ideology. (From I. E. S. Edwards, The Pyramids of Egypt [Harmondsworth: 
Penguin, 1961], 54, fig. 5. Reprinted with the permission of Penguin Books)

156         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
revolution from above that suggests parallels with the Soviet Union of the 
1930s or other modern states that have forced radical social changes on 
the population. Egypt was divided into provinces (nomes) controlled by 
administrators that bore no relation to the earlier pattern of competing 
chiefdoms.52 Perhaps this is why the ideology and public symbolism of the 
Old Kingdom seems excessive.
The revolution faltered at the end of the Sixth Dynasty (2150 b.c.e.), 
when the Old Kingdom collapsed and Egypt reverted to a group of regional 
political centers. Centralized government was restored in 2040 b.c.e., but 
unrest and civil war erupted within a few decades and lasting stability was 
not achieved until 1991 b.c.e. under the Twelfth Dynasty. The Middle 
Kingdom resuscitated the religio-political doctrines of the Old Kingdom 
and publicized them in new ways that paralleled the governmental pro-
paganda of modern nation-states. The preceding period was officially 
recalled as a nightmare of chaos. A “police state” atmosphere prevailed.53 
The pattern again is reminiscent of the Stalin era: the reactionary conser-
vatism of a successful revolutionary movement.
By contrast, Sumer had developed in a very different way from Egypt, 
with the emergence of autonomous city-states. The social and economic 
hierarchy that represented early Sumerian civilization had arisen largely, 
it seems, through the “labor revolution” described earlier, including the 
managerial demands that accompanied it, and was not imposed from 
above.54 Perhaps the autonomous urban centers would have maintained 
the steady pace of innovation that preceded and accompanied their 
formation, but within a few centuries they were forcibly incorporated 
into a larger nation-state—first by one of the south Mesopotamian kings 
(2375 b.c.e.) and several decades later by Sargon, who united northern 
and southern Mesopotamia under the Akkadian state. The region was 
subsequently controlled by others, including the Babylonian and Persian 
empires. Although there were some advances in knowledge, especially in 
astronomy and mathematics, the rate of progress seems slow in compari-
son with that in the earlier period.55
The early civilizations of Eurasia were disrupted in various ways by the 
development and spread of iron technology after 1200 b.c.e. The critical 
innovations emerged beyond their borders and control. Once the techni-
cal challenges of iron smelting were overcome, the widespread distribu-
tion and accessibility of iron-ore deposits ensured the mass-production of 
cheap and effective weapons and farming tools. Another innovation from 
the uncivilized fringe that had both military and economic consequences 

mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        157
was the domestication of the horse. Mounted cavalrymen with iron weap-
ons toppled pharaohs and administrators, as states and empires rose and 
fell during the many centuries of conflict that followed. Iron technology 
also transformed Africa. Bantu-speaking peoples with iron implements 
had occupied most of the lands south of the Sahara by 1000 c.e.56  
The later civilizations of Eurasia were less effective at suppressing change 
and innovation—especially in comparison with ancient Egypt. Among 
them, Greece made the most impressive contribution to the growth of the 
mind, and it may be significant that it began as a collection of autonomous 
city-states around 600 b.c.e. Inevitably, perhaps, they were incorporated 
into a larger political entity, initially as a result of the Peloponnesian War, 
which ended in 404 b.c.e., and subsequently by Philip of Macedon and 
his son Alexander, whose death in 323 b.c.e. is equated with the begin-
ning of the Hellenistic period. And although the principal contributions 
to knowledge are usually attributed to the city-state phase, the most signifi-
cant technical achievements date to the Hellenistic period.
During the earlier phase, there were some advances in architecture, 
which included the application of knowledge about optics and acoustics, 
and innovations in mechanical military equipment such as catapults. But 
the Hellenistic period (323–146 b.c.e.) produced a series of major break-
throughs in mechanical engineering that laid the foundations of indus-
trial technology.57 Among them were levers, screws, gears, springs, valves, 
hydraulic pumps, and compressed-air devices. These technics were accom-
panied by brilliant mathematical work, which—anticipating Galileo— 
included the application of numbers to mechanics by Archimedes (287–
212 b.c.e.).58
Extenuating circumstances may have created a favorable environment 
for novelty and innovation in Greece, even after the autonomous city-
states were subsumed under a central government. Much of the creative 
thinking of the Hellenistic period took place in Alexandria, a large and 
ethnically diverse city ruled for eighty years by the first three kings of the 
Ptolemaic dynasty, who actively promoted the growth of knowledge. The 
massive library at Alexandria represented another major contribution 
to the latter. It was an accessible storehouse of external memory on an 
unprecedented scale. Innovations also came from other cities that, like 
Alexandria, were outliers or colonies.59
But the application and dissemination of the engineering innovations 
of Archimedes and others were limited, and they did not have a major 
impact on Hellenistic society and economy. The primary applications 

158         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
seem to have been confined to ship design and military machinery. One 
constraint may have been a commonly expressed preference for abstract 
theory over practical use. Ultimately, these discoveries had little effect on 
how the ancient Greeks interpreted the world; they never developed the 
mechanistic outlook of the European clock makers.60
The history of Chinese civilization probably yields the most insight 
into the relationship between the organization of the nation-state and the 
growth of knowledge. This is because both the pace of innovation and 
the degree of political centralization varied significantly during the course 
of Chinese history, which followed a different path from that of western 
Eurasia. There were few or no major inventions in the millennia leading 
up to the formation of a nation-state around 2000 b.c.e.,61 and Chinese 
civilization began with something of a technological deficit relative to 
Sumer. But in the centuries that followed, key innovations were broadly 
applied, with profound effects on society and economy. The most signifi-
cant were the development and spread of iron agricultural implements, 
including the plow, and irrigation systems, which took place during the 
Eastern Zhou period (770–221 b.c.e.) with substantial impact on agricul-
tural productivity.62
The national political structure underwent dramatic changes before and 
during the Eastern Zhou period. The first two dynasties, Xia and Shang, 
had consolidated many but not all of the numerous towns scattered across 
northern China. The social hierarchy of these towns was based primarily 
on family relationships. The Eastern Zhou state disintegrated into smaller 
competing entities during the Warring States period (450–221 b.c.e.), 
recalling the collapse of the Old Kingdom in Egypt or the city-states period 
in ancient Greece. Like the latter, it is associated with a burst of creativity 
in philosophy and literature, as well as with technological advances.
China was reunified in 221 b.c.e. under the Qin dynasty, which 
embarked on a major expansion of central government power—crushing 
local landlords, establishing a national system of weights and measures, 
and even inaugurating monumental construction projects, including the 
Great Wall. The emperor promulgated an explicit ideology, Legalism, and 
burned books and executed scholars who expressed alternative ideas. But 
the Qin dynasty was short-lived, and China resumed its accumulation and 
expansion of knowledge under a succession of dynasties that exerted vary-
ing degrees of central control over the population.63
After 700, the rate of growth accelerated in many spheres of technology 
and China began to move toward an industrial economy far in advance of 

mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        159
any other civilization in the world. Earlier developments in iron produc-
tion led to coal-fired blast furnaces in northeastern China. In 1078, tax 
officials recorded a total production figure of 125,000 tons of smelted iron 
(figure 5.6).64 The earlier irrigation systems had led to advances in hydrau-
lic engineering and water-powered machinery, such as trip hammers and 
bellows for the smelting furnaces. Moving water also was used to power Su 
Sung’s famous mechanical clock of 1092. There were innovations in textile 
manufacturing, including the mechanical cotton gin and water-powered 
spinning frame. All these developments were accompanied by a dynamic 
commercial economy and an expanding overseas trade, which was facili-
tated by the most advanced ships in the world, constructed with watertight 
bulkheads and navigated with the aid of a magnetic compass.65
The incipient industrial era came to end about 1400. The innovations 
largely ceased, and the activities of the merchant fleet were curtailed. China 
Figure 5.6  China appeared to be in the early stages of an industrial age roughly 1,000 
years ago—and far in advance of Europe—with accelerating iron production, intensifying 
use of water-power technologies, and international overseas trade. This depiction of a 
smelting furnace with water-powered bellows dates to about 1300. (From Joseph Need-
ham, Science and Civilization in China, vol. 4, part 2, Mechanical Engineering [Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1965], 371, fig. 602. Reprinted with the permission of Cam-
bridge University Press)

160         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
fell behind other civilizations technologically and eventually became vul-
nerable to smaller nation-states like Britain and Japan.66 The suppression 
of cultural change at this time is widely attributed to the policies of the 
Ming dynasty, which took over in 1368, used central government bureau-
cracy to discourage the growing power of industrialists and merchants. 
Foreign trade was prohibited in 1371 by imperial decree, and the construc-
tion of large ships was banned in 1436. Similar policies were continued by 
the succeeding (and final) Qing, or Manchu, dynasty.67
The timing of the government crackdown may have been critical. 
Despite the widespread effects of the accelerating innovations in technol-
ogy and their applications, the emerging pattern of industrial production 
and expanding commerce did not have a lasting impact on Chinese society 
and thought. Had continued growth been permitted, or even encouraged, 
by the central government, perhaps the modern world would have been 
largely a creation of the Chinese mind.
The Modern World as a Change of Mind
[T]here is an immediate and close connection between Christian 
ideas of creation and of the Kingdom of God and the development 
of modern technology. There is also a connection between Christian 
hope and the technological utopia of the future.
Ernst Benz
The central problem in the history of the modern world is why and how 
western Europe broke out of the creative stasis into which all civilizations 
fall sooner or later. The explanation lies in understanding how the creative 
powers of the mind, specifically of individual brains, can operate freely 
within the hierarchical structure of a nation-state. There is no obvious or 
simple answer to the problem, but—like the earlier emergence of farming 
settlements and civilizations—both environmental variables and specific 
historical factors seem to have played a role in what happened in Europe 
after 1200.
Western Europe occupies a unique position in the Northern Hemi-
sphere with respect to temperature and precipitation. Clockwise currents 
in the North Atlantic Ocean ensure mild and moist climates despite com-
paratively high latitude. As a result, biotic productivity is higher in this 
region than anywhere else in northern Eurasia. In 1200, agricultural pro-
ductivity and population density were rising due to the effects of a warm-

mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        161
climate oscillation (Medieval Warm Period). The available food surplus 
also seems to have increased, and a higher proportion of the population 
could pursue activities other than farming.68
In addition, the political and cultural landscape was unusual and possibly 
unique. Western Europe was divided into a chaotic tapestry of kingdoms and 
smaller political entities that had once been incorporated into the mighty 
Roman Empire. No central authority existed, and—as some historians have 
observed—no individual ruler or government had the power to suppress 
threatening novelties throughout the region, as did the Ming dynasty.69 At 
the same time, shared affiliation with the former Roman Empire provided 
a common language (at least for the literate) and church organization. The 
components of a large and diverse super-brain were integrated.
Several historians, most notably Ernst Benz and Lynn White, argued 
that the origins of the industrial civilization of Europe lay in the theol-
ogy of Western Christendom. They emphasized the peculiar attitude 
toward the natural world articulated by many in the Western church, who, 
rather than seeking to live in harmony with it, viewed nature as a poten-
tial domesticate to be exploited, controlled, and, if possible, redesigned 
for human benefit.70 And far from being disdained, manual labor and 
practical achievements were regarded as virtuous. A deeply rooted Judeo-
Christian construction of time as linear and progressive, rather than cycli-
cal, may have created a more favorable climate for novelty.71
In any case, after centuries of stasis in farming techniques and technol-
ogy under the Roman Empire, a succession of innovations after 700 laid 
the foundation for an “agricultural revolution” in Europe. They included 
improvements in the plow, toward a heavy wheeled design with a mold-
board for slicing through turf, and the shift from oxen to more efficient 
horses for drawing it. And the use of horses required the development of 
a new type of collar and iron shoes to protect their hoofs from damage, 
especially in moist climates. Another critical innovation was move from 
Roman two-field crop rotation to a three-field system, which reduced fal-
low land from 50 to 33 percent each year.72 The combined effect of these 
changes seems to have been substantial increases in crop yields during the 
centuries leading up to and after the beginning of the Medieval Warm 
Period, which saw further increases as climates improved after 1000.
Historians have long debated the role of slavery in inhibiting techno-
logical innovation and, more broadly, social and cultural change among 
the early civilizations down through late antiquity in western Eurasia (that 
is, the Roman Empire). As slavery declined, the argument goes, incentives 

162         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
for new labor-saving technologies and general improvements in economic 
efficiency would have risen. Lewis Mumford thought that the critical issue 
was replacing human muscle with alternative sources of energy.73 In west-
ern Europe, such a trend became apparent by 800, with the growing appli-
cation of water and wind power.
The technology for hydropower had been developed much earlier than 
the eighth century. There is evidence of water wheels in ancient Greece as 
well as in the Roman Empire. Indeed, the Romans made some improve-
ments in their design.74 The difference lies in the widespread use of water 
power during the later Middle Ages. By 1086, tax records indicate no fewer 
than 5,624 water wheels spinning in southern England alone. The gener-
ated mechanical energy was employed primarily to grind grain, but also 
saw other applications, including to power trip-hammers. In some coastal 
areas, where stream gradients were low, tidal mills were constructed.75
The windmill, though—first reported in Iran by 700—was a post-Roman 
invention.76 Although wind power had been used to propel boats and 
ships for several thousand years, the idea of applying it to the generation of 
mechanical energy was apparently derived from knowledge of water wheels. 
The effective adaptation of the technology to moving air required the devel-
opment of a revolving pedestal in order to adjust the position of the wheel 
to shifting wind directions. In western Europe, windmills were widespread 
before 1200 (figure 5.7). No fewer than 120 of them were operating near the 
Flemish town of Ypres by the end of the thirteenth century.77
The mechanical technology that Mumford termed the “key machine” of 
the industrial age—the weight-driven clock—was engineered somewhere in 
western Europe around 1250.78 Its advent and far-reaching consequences 
for technological development and worldview were mentioned in chapter 1.  
In one respect, the weight-driven clock was regressive because it ultimately 
relied on human muscle power to provide the energy. The escapement 
mechanism, designed to release the stored energy, was a major technical 
achievement, however. And it was the first machine built entirely of metal. 
The chief incentive apparently was to create a device for the timing of 
prayers in monastic orders that was more accurate and reliable than the 
water clock.79
The impact of the mechanical clock on the human imagination was con-
siderable. Clocks were, as David Landes remarked, “like computers today, 
the technological sensation of their time.”80 The clock makers became a 
new category of technical specialist, and their knowledge and skills found 
applications to other technologies, such as water wheels. Clocks eventu-

mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        163
ally spread to every community and created an arbitrary temporal matrix 
within which virtually everyone functioned. They generated the temporal 
component of the daily landscape of the mind. They became a model and 
metaphor for the entire universe.
The work of the clock makers was enhanced by another important 
innovation before 1300: eyeglasses.81 The invention of spectacles reflected 
expanding knowledge of the properties of glass and how to manipulate 
them to achieve yet another step toward remaking the human organism. Yet 
despite the discernible momentum in harnessing new sources of energy and 
inventing new technologies, western Europe experienced a slowdown and 
something of a backlash during the fourteenth century. Catastrophic death 
and population decline were caused by severe famine in the second decade 
of the century, followed by outbreaks of plague, especially the so-called Black 
Death (1348–1350), which wiped out at least one-third of the population of 
Europe. Wars and violent uprisings erupted. There was a surge of interest in 
religious mysticism and a corresponding obsession with witchcraft.82
Figure 5.7  Both water- and wind-powered technology became increasingly widespread 
in western Europe during the late Middle Ages. (From Joel Mokyr, The Lever of Riches: 
Technological Creativity and Economic Progress [New York: Oxford University Press, 1990], 
45, fig. 10. Reprinted with the permission of Oxford University Press)

164         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
The pace of innovation resumed during the fifteenth century, which 
became the critical turning point for the emerging construction of reality 
that became the modern world. The invention of movable type and the 
printing press in 1455 had consequences on the same scale as those of the 
mechanical clock. Within fifty years, more books were produced than had 
been in the preceding thousand years.83 Information was communicated 
among the disparate elements of the collective mind, stimulating new 
thought, and stored in readily accessible form for future generations. It 
was the most significant development in information technology or neuro-
technology since the creation of writing.
Another innovation with fateful consequences was the adoption of gun-
powder, probably from China, and its application to the propulsion of 
projectiles. Despite many advances in the catapult by the ancient Greeks 
and later improvements in the crossbow, the fundamental design of projec-
tile weaponry in 1200 had not changed since the late Upper Paleolithic. A 
heavy projectile propelled by an explosive force in a metal tube represented 
a potentially major increase in power and range. The earliest cannons are 
reported from the early fourteenth century; during the fifteenth, they 
became larger, more mobile, and more common. Competition and con-
flict among the fragmented political entities of western Europe ensured a 
perpetual arms race that yielded regular improvements in military technol-
ogy.84 And armies in western Europe were deployed in marching forma-
tions with increasing precision, reproducing the hierarchical organization 
of the military in simple geometric shapes on the landscape.
European artillery and small arms also ensured an overwhelming mili-
tary advantage over other peoples. Firearms played a role in the explora-
tion of the world (in conjunction with diseases), which was initiated in the 
fifteenth century. Although the impact on non-European local popula-
tions and cultures was catastrophic, and the economic benefits were prob-
lematic, the people of western Europe became the first to acquire a knowl-
edge of the planet as a whole. Like the mechanical clock, the expanded 
concept of the world had a powerful effect on their imagination. Some 
improvements in ship design and navigation were essential, such as the 
axial rudder and compass (also from China), but Fernand Braudel argued 
that the most important factor was psychological: overcoming the fear of 
sailing across vast expanses of ocean like the Atlantic.85 This reflected per-
haps a wider change in attitude toward the natural world.
The relationship between the acquisition of knowledge through both 
technological innovation and contact with other peoples and the con-

mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        165
struction of reality is illustrated on a grand scale in Europe between the 
fifteenth and seventeenth centuries. The accelerating pace of innovation 
after 1200 not only yielded a new body of knowledge about materials 
and processes of the surrounding world, but tipped the balance toward a 
novel construction of reality based on the model of the machine. By the 
end of the seventeenth century, Lewis Mumford wrote, “there existed a 
fully articulated philosophy of the universe, on purely mechanical lines, 
which served as a starting point for all the physical sciences and for fur-
ther technical improvements.”86 The “scientific revolution” was led by a 
small group of people scattered across western Europe, including Georg 
Bauer (Agricola, 1494–1555) in Germany, Galileo (1564–1642) in Italy, 
Descartes (1596–1650) in France, and Francis Bacon (1561–1626) in 
England. For the first time since the Lower Paleolithic, the function of 
the sensory hand was understood and the acquisition of knowledge was 
tied explicitly to physical experimentation: technology applied to science. 
Whenever possible, processes were described mathematically; when neces-
sary, mathematical knowledge was expanded for this purpose, such as the 
invention of calculus.87
To some extent, the Europeans redesigned the mind itself. Although 
brain function had been altered technologically since the creation of mne-
monic devices in the early Upper Paleolithic, the creative powers of the 
mind either had been left free to roam, although always constrained by 
social setting, or had been suppressed by priests and police. The revolu-
tionary scientists recognized the need to manipulate creativity by testing 
alternative realities under controlled conditions and by minimizing the 
subjectivity of the brain. The early civilizations had applied mathematics 
to technology—now it was applied to thought.
The rewards of creativity finally were recognized, even by kings, and a 
previously unknown sense of forward momentum was emerging. In 1306, 
Dominican Fra Giordano of Pisa noted both the benefits and the nov-
elty of spectacles, invented within his lifetime, and remarked that “not all 
the arts have been found. . . . Every day one could discover a new art.”88 
The sense of progress was a new form of super-brain consciousness that 
reflected an awareness of historical or cultural rather than biological linear 
time. Not only could the enlightened and innovative present be distin-
guished from the ignorant and backward past, but an alternative future 
reality—a paradise of knowledge—could be imagined with confidence. 
Francis Bacon was particularly outspoken in his vision of technological 
progress. He saw not only the limitations of the past, but also the potential 

166         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
of the future, describing a world with submarines, aircraft, research labs, 
telephones, and even air-conditioners.89
People Without History?
[S]ome savages have recently improved a little in some of their sim-
pler arts.
Charles Darwin
As European explorers spread across the oceans and disembarked on 
strange shores, they encountered a wide range of people previously 
unknown to them. In Mexico, they confronted a technologically primi-
tive civilization with a major urban center. In the central Pacific, they 
saw chiefdoms composed of thousands of individuals. In the Arctic, they 
were impressed with people who inhabited large villages without benefit 
of agriculture. In some places, they discovered nomadic foraging societies 
equipped with very simple technology.90
Europeans of the eighteenth century were especially struck by the native 
people of Australia, who had little in the way of clothing or equipment. 
They came to be viewed as the most primitive of all peoples. When Wil-
liam J. Sollas published Ancient Hunters and Their Modern Representatives in 
1911, he presented them as typical of Middle Paleolithic (and non-modern 
human) foragers. Even more primitive, Sollas asserted—and evocative of 
the Lower Paleolithic—were the already extinct natives of Tasmania (a large 
island off the southeastern coast of Australia).91
The discovery of a wide range of societies and cultures—from the very 
small and simple to the large and complex—had a powerful effect on the 
European imagination. Simple foraging societies like the native Austra-
lians aroused special fascination; they seemed to be “living fossils,” offer-
ing a glimpse of earliest humanity. They provided further support to the 
view of history as progress. Indeed, it would appear that encounters with 
“primitive societies” had as much, if not more, impact on thinking about 
social and cultural evolution as did the discovery of ancient artifacts and 
the recognition by the early nineteenth century that they, too, could be 
organized into a sequence of evolutionary progress.92
The existence of such societies posed a question in this context: Why 
had some cultures failed to develop agriculture, power technology, and 
large settlements? Why had some people remained at what seemed to be 
a Middle or even a Lower Paleolithic level of society and culture? A widely 

mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        167
accepted answer to this question in the nineteenth century was that the 
contrasts in technology and organization between modern and premod-
ern societies reflected biological differences: primitive societies were the 
product of inferior races.93 Such a view not only was morally objectionable, 
but was then and remains without any credible supporting evidence. In 
the years since their initial encounters with European explorers, most of 
these populations have adopted contemporary technologies and become 
part of complex societies. The global differentiation that began with the 
movement of modern humans out of Africa 50,000 years ago and their 
dispersal throughout the world has been in reverse for several centuries. As 
this trend continues, the differences among various peoples that seemed 
so fundamental to the Europeans will be understood as the consequence 
of historical factors.
An alternative explanation was environment: foraging peoples and other 
simpler societies encountered by European explorers inhabited places with 
severe limitations on growth and development. In many cases, this seems 
to be a valid explanation. Recent hunter-gatherers often have been found 
in desert margins, arctic tundra, or other environments where the poten-
tial for agriculture and population growth is constrained by aridity or cold. 
There are exceptions to the pattern, however. Some foraging societies of 
the recent past have occupied habitats with clear potential for domestica-
tion and sedentary settlement. And anecdotal evidence suggests that some 
of these foragers were well aware of the possibilities and requisite tech-
niques for the cultivation of plants. They simply preferred their traditional 
way of life.94
One reason why Europeans misjudged foraging societies during the sev-
enteenth and later centuries is that they lacked a historical perspective 
on them. With a better knowledge of the archaeological record of mod-
ern humans in Australia, southern Africa, northeastern Asia, and other 
regions, it becomes apparent that all of them have changed over time. 
With the advent of the mind and the spread of modern human groups, 
truly static cultures like those of the Lower and Middle Paleolithic van-
ished. The native Australians, for example, who comprise a diverse array 
of people living in a variety of habitats, have experienced nearly contin-
ual change since their arrival more than 40,000 years ago.95 Even groups 
equipped with the simplest technology have created novel implements that 
probably were unknown in the early or middle Upper Paleolithic.96
At the same time, rates of change clearly have varied considerably. A 
slow pace of innovation and change may indeed reflect local environmental  

168         mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
variables. But historical factors also seem to be at work. Roughly 2,000 
years ago, for example, people in the Bering Strait region engineered some 
complex technology related to whale hunting that had significant social 
and demographic consequences. Their neighbors farther east—known to 
archaeologists as Late Dorset—did not , and there is evidence that they had 
actually discarded some of their earlier innovations, such as the bow and 
arrow.97 Like nineteenth-century China, the Late Dorset people fell prey to 
more technologically advanced foreigners, at least partly as a result of their 
own historical trajectory. Even without a rigid hierarchy and centralized 
government to suppress innovation, the Late Dorset seem to have been 
particularly resistant to change; perhaps this also was a significant factor 
among other foraging societies.

6
The Vision Animal
The people themselves are friendly and intelligent,  
with a good sense of humor. Though fond of relaxation,  
they’re capable of hard physical work when necessary.  
Otherwise, they don’t much care for it—but they  
never get tired of using their brains.
Thomas More
At the time that anatomically modern humans evolved in Africa, 
the social insects were arguably the dominant form of terrestrial animal life 
on Earth. The ants alone are estimated to have achieved a biomass roughly 
equal to that of the current human population (more than 6.5 billion peo-
ple). The social insects had assumed control of the most favorable nesting 
sites, forcing solitary insects into marginal zones. Their success is attributed 
to their organizational adaptations, particularly impressive among the euso-
cial, or “true social,” insects such as bees and ants. The ants are represented 
by thousands of species and a wide variety of social adaptations.1
The eusocial insects exhibit many parallels with modern humans. The 
honeybees are noted for their rare ability to externalize representations, 
which they do with body movements in analogical and iconic form. But 
it is the ants that reflect the most complex social organization and dis-
play extraordinary related behavior. The farming leaf-cutter ants of the 
Americas are said to be the most advanced. Colonies of Atta comprise 
more than a million individuals, subdivided into numerous specialized 
worker castes, which coordinate their work through a multimodal com-
munication system. Foragers move along a road network maintained by 
road-worker crews, cutting and transporting leaf fragments back to garden 
plots, where they are planted to produce fungus, which subsequently is 

170        the vision animal
harvested to feed the colony. The quantity of sediment moved to excavate 
one of their nest complexes in Brazil was 40 tons.2
Naturalists and philosophers have long marveled at the human-like 
features of insect societies, but the most remarkable aspect of the paral-
lel is that the characteristics of eusociality should have surfaced among 
a hominoid taxon. With their massive bodies, low population densities, 
slow reproductive rates, and protracted infant dependences, apes and 
humans are in many ways the antithesis of the social insects. Eusociality is 
extremely rare among vertebrates, undoubtedly due to their reproductive 
biology. The only examples are found among the relatively fast-breeding 
rodents, specifically two genera of African mole rat.3 As a result of some 
improbable developments in their evolutionary history, humans ended up 
re-creating features of the social insects, which provide an evolutionary 
context for humans as important as that of the primates.
The historical or genetic evolutionary relationship between social 
insects and humans is obviously remote. Humans belong to the phylum 
Chordata, which separates them from the insects by hundreds of millions 
of years. The similarities between the two are a classic case of convergent 
evolution,4 in which the same or similar features evolved independently in 
unrelated groups. In this case, the convergence seems to reflect the emer-
gent properties of highly complex systems.5 Among the eusocial insects, 
these properties yield a super-organism.6
Although modern humans are rapidly approaching the point at which 
they could reproduce themselves biotechnologically in a manner similar to 
that of the insects, the complex social and economic hierarchies of their 
organizations are not based on reproductive biology and genetic relation-
ships. They are instead based on information or, rather—because genes 
themselves are a form of information—a type of information that is coded 
symbolically in vast networks of nerve cells in the brain. Insects also store 
coded information in their brains, but if the organizational adaptations 
of humans are constrained by their reproductive biology, the storage and 
manipulation of nongenetic information among the insects is constrained 
by their small body and brain size. Humans inherited a large brain from 
the African apes, and it tripled in size within a few million years. More-
over, at a critical point in their later evolution, humans developed the 
structures (for example, an expanded prefrontal cortex) that are necessary 
to integrate many brains into one—a super-brain.
Humans evolved two features related to the coded information stored 
in neural networks that rendered them unique among all living organisms. 

the vision animal        171
First, they developed the ability to translate that information into various 
material forms outside the brain—to create phenotypes of ideas rather than 
genes. Second, they developed the ability to combine and recombine that 
information with a sufficient number of elements and hierarchical levels 
that the variety of creations is potentially infinite.
After the formation of the super-brain among anatomically modern 
humans in Africa roughly 100,000 years ago, human organizations came 
to exhibit properties not previously observed in organic evolution. They 
created a growing and ultimately immense quantity of structured informa-
tion outside the brain, and the processes by which the structures were gen-
erated and selected cannot be accounted for by the principles of evolution-
ary biology (genetic mutation and natural selection). They accumulated 
knowledge—organized nongenetic information—as a super-organismal 
entity, unconstrained by biological space or time.
These human organizations or societies were not super-organisms, 
however. The reproductive biology never caught up with the neocortical 
integration, yielding a society largely composed of competing and cantan-
kerous individuals without close genetic ties. The result is a freakish vari-
ant of eusociality in which the collective mind—the super-brain—coexists 
uncomfortably with a group of organisms.
The Mind as History
[A]ll progress depends on the unreasonable man.
George Bernard Shaw
Humans are odd creatures. They are organisms produced by the process of 
biological evolution, but they also participate in the phenomenon of the 
mind. They lead conflicted lives.
On the one hand, humans cannot escape the realities of organic life; 
consciousness itself is dependent on the functioning of evolved systems 
for the digestion of food, circulation and oxygenation of blood, release 
of neurotransmitters in the brain, and other bodily functions. Much of 
human life revolves around issues clearly related to evolutionary biology: 
the acquisition of energy, control of territory, defense of resources, repro-
duction and provisioning of offspring, and aging and death. On the other 
hand, humans receive and generate mental representations as part of a col-
lective entity that seems to operate in accordance with the emergent prop-
erties of systems more complex than those previously observed in organic 

172        the vision animal
evolution. The structures of the super-brain or mind are generated (and 
selected) by a process of recombining information in complex hierarchical 
form that is unknown among other organisms.
I began with a discussion of how scholars of the seventeenth century 
addressed the problem of the mind. They were attempting to explain the 
universe in mechanistic terms and to place humans somewhere in this tech-
nologically inspired view of reality. Descartes laid the foundation for a debate 
that continues today by excluding the mind from natural science. There was 
opposition to this view from the outset, for example from Thomas Hobbes, 
and it only increased as technology and scientific explanation continued to 
progress through the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
The discovery of a mechanism for evolutionary change in the mid-nine-
teenth century was a major development. Darwin’s idea was so powerful 
that it seems to have tipped the balance toward incorporating humanity into 
natural science. It significantly reinforced a trend that already was apparent 
in the writings of Johann Herder, Herbert Spencer, and others.7 Thus in 
the early twentieth century, the philosopher of history R. G. Collingwood 
found little support for his complaint against the “tyranny of natural sci-
ence” over philosophy and his contention that history is an autonomous 
form of thought—as well as the key to understanding the mind.8 One of his 
allies was V. Gordon Childe. But Childe had been pigeon-holed as a doc-
trinaire Marxist by the 1940s, and his later writings were largely ignored.9
Reviewing centuries of thought about history, Collingwood praised 
those who had affirmed the autonomy of mind and history. He was par-
ticularly impressed with the work of his contemporary Benedetto Croce 
(1866–1952) in Italy.10 Collingwood also admired the historical thinking 
of the two most eminent German philosophers: Immanuel Kant (1724–
1804) and G. W. F. Hegel (1770–1831). Both had an advantage over many 
of their successors: they felt no compulsion to explain the mind in the 
context of evolutionary biology.
Kant was not a historian and wrote only a few short pieces on the sub-
ject, but his observations and reflections are still worth reading. He was 
appalled by the senseless waste and folly that characterized much of history 
and referred disparagingly to the “idiotic course of things human.”11 But like 
others of his epoch, he accepted the idea that history was progress, if some-
what halting and uneven. Kant defined this progress as the development of 
the mind and emphasized the cumulative nature of the process. According 
to Collingwood, “he identified the essence of mind as . . . autonomy, the 
power to make laws for oneself. This enabled him to put forward a new 

the vision animal        173
interpretation of the idea of history as the education of the human race.”12 
Kant went on to address the question of what drives progress. His answer 
was “antagonisms” or conflicts within and between societies. Because indi-
viduals constantly put their selfish desires above the common good, Kant 
concluded that “from such crooked wood as man is made of, nothing per-
fectly straight can be built.” Moreover, much of the attention of nation-states 
was consumed by war or “constant readiness for war.” In their efforts to 
overcome these evils, Kant believed, humans had made and would continue 
to make progress toward a more rational world.13
Although notoriously obtuse, Hegel articulated similar ideas about both 
the direction and the propulsion of history. These ideas, which reflected 
the unmistakable influence of Kant, were presented in the introduction to 
his Philosophy of History (1840). Hegel also endorsed the notion of progress 
in history (“an advance to something better, more perfect”), which he felt 
was lacking in nature (“only a perpetually self-repeating cycle”).14 He saw 
the passion of individuals as the driving force behind change and progress 
because “in history an additional result is commonly produced by human 
actions beyond that which they aim at and obtain. . . . They gratify their 
own interest; but something further is thereby accomplished, latent in the 
actions in question, though not present to their consciousness, and not 
included in their design.”15 Even more so than Kant, Hegel confined his 
view of historical progress to the political realm, rather than the broader 
growth of knowledge, and this, as Collingwood noted, encouraged him 
to the unfortunate conclusion that it had achieved culmination in the 
eighteenth-century nation-state of Prussia.16
The conflict that Kant and Hegel identified as the catalyst for histori-
cal progress is the dissonance between individual humans as organisms 
enhancing their own reproductive fitness and the organizational creations 
of the collective mind. It is the same distinction made earlier that mod-
ern human society is based largely on a super-brain, not a super-organism. 
The genetics of the super-organism yield a society composed of individuals 
that function like the organs or cells of an organism; everyone follows the 
program, and there are no runoff elections or letters to the editor. The 
super-brain produces something very different.
Progress in the form of technological innovation with widespread social 
and economic consequences is especially evident in capitalist industrial 
societies after 1500. Much of the creation and dissemination of novel tech-
nologies has been driven by competition in the commercial sector. The 
novelties cover everything from jumbo jets to disposable diapers. Some of 

174        the vision animal
them, such as the mass-produced automobile or the birth control pill, have 
clearly effected changes large and small on the societies and super-brains 
that made them. It is more difficult however, to see how competition 
among individuals in earlier or simpler societies has driven innovation. 
Was this the source of writing or the spear-thrower? 
Competition between societies—often erupting into open conflict—is 
another inescapable source of innovation. Here, too, the best examples 
derive from nation-states of the industrial era (although not necessar-
ily capitalist nations). International competition drove innovation in 
military technology after 1400 across Europe, and the process became 
especially dynamic after the mid-nineteenth century. But in these cases, 
the antagonists represent separate super-brains, or at least poorly inte-
grated components of a super-brain (for example, the French and Ger-
mans), and the dissonance between individual organisms and the col-
lective mind would not seem to apply. In fact, it would seem to be the 
reverse: patriotic individuals laboring on the design of armored vehicles 
or microwave radar for the homeland appear to function as parts of a 
super-organism after all. The same principle is illustrated by individual 
sacrifices on the battlefield.17 Moreover, some of the technological inno-
vations, particularly in the realm of communications, have been steadily 
enhancing the integration of the super-brain, including the integration 
of those collective minds that once represented antagonistic nation-
states. The most striking example is Europe in the early twenty-first cen-
tury, but the broader trend is global. The diversification of super-brains 
that began more than 50,000 years ago in Africa with the dispersal of 
modern humans has been reversed. Humans seem destined to re-create 
the original unified super-brain or mind of the later African Middle 
Stone Age. 
Perhaps the critical element in historical progress is the evolved capacity 
of the mind to imagine the future, to create alternative realities. It may be 
recalled that the essential function of the metazoan brain is to acquire infor-
mation about changes in the environment and that the creative powers of 
the human mind represent a unique variant of this function—imagining  
things that never were and asking why not. The imaginings range from 
an altered shape of an arrow point to the workers’ paradise and include 
an immense body of idiocy, but they clearly provide a constant stimulus 
for actions that may have significant consequences. Other animals may 
respond to the visual image of a food item or the ominous tread of a preda-
tor, but only humans risk their lives to pursue daydreams.

the vision animal        175
A History of the Future
[Y]ou can make systems that think a million times faster than a per-
son. With AI, these systems could do engineering design. Combin-
ing this with the capability of a system to build something that is 
better than it, you have the possibility for a very abrupt transition.
K. Eric Drexler
It was Lord Byron who suggested that he and each of the guests at his villa 
on Lake Geneva in the summer of 1816 write “a ghost story,” as recounted 
years later by Mary Shelley. The future wife of Percy Bysshe Shelley eventu-
ally composed a tale inspired by discussions between Shelley and Byron 
about the principle of life and the experiments of Erasmus Darwin. She 
began to wonder if “perhaps the component parts of a creature might be 
manufactured” and endowed with life.18
Ironically, the tale that Mary Shelley wrote and later published as a 
novel was the antithesis of a ghost story. Frankenstein is not about the 
returning spirit of a dead person, but about a human produced by tech-
nology. The genre is science fiction, and it may be considered a literary 
variant of the speculations of Francis Bacon. Writing two centuries later, 
Shelley could see, quite accurately it seems, where nineteenth-century tech-
nological progress was leading. Her novel was a deeply religious work that 
reflected not the bright optimism of Bacon, but the conviction that the 
inevitable attempt to “mock the stupendous mechanism of the Creator” 
would produce a monster.19
Like so many projects, from agriculture to pyramids, this one has deep 
roots in the Upper Paleolithic. In one way or another, we have been work-
ing on the creation of life and mind for at least 50,000 years—in both 
robotics and biotechnology. The earliest robots were the traps and snares 
designed possibly as early as 40,000 years ago and almost certainly by the 
later Upper Paleolithic. These were simple devices built to perform a single 
and highly specialized human function: catching a small mammal or bird 
(aquatic versions were designed for fish). They were “smart machines” with 
a cognitive function: respond to a stimulus received from the prey animal 
as it stepped into the snare or trap. In theory, they could be produced in 
large numbers and deployed across wide areas along traplines, creating an 
army of robots to perform important tasks for a small group of humans.
More broadly speaking, mechanical technology, which is unique to 
modern humans and the mind, mimics the functions of an organism. At 

176        the vision animal
first, mechanical technology operated as an extension of the body, draw-
ing its energy entirely from human muscle power. The creation of tech-
nologies powered by other sources, initially wind and moving water, was a 
major step toward building a machine that could mimic a whole organism. 
The mechanical clock, although ultimately powered by muscle, stored that 
energy and controlled its release over an extended period of time—like a 
beating heart—through an ingenious escapement device. Clocks fascinated 
people: Thomas Hobbes referred to them as “artificiall life.” They had a 
profound effect on how their makers viewed the world, including the liv-
ing world.
As to the manufacture of the “component parts” that Mary Shelley  
mentioned, here also the history is lengthy. It has a precursor in the 
Upper Paleolithic with the production of various technologies designed 
to enhance the function of specific body parts: tailored clothing to func-
tion as artificial skin and hair, a spear-thrower to serve as an elongated 
arm, and artificial memory systems to enhance brain function. It began 
in earnest with the manufacture of replacement parts—prosthetic limbs, 
wooden teeth, and wigs, among others—which apparently dates to at least 
500 b.c.e. and had became common by the sixteenth century in Europe. 
In recent decades, impressive advances have been made with the appli-
cation of electronic information technology to artificial organ function, 
including vision.
Key elements of the brain also have been replicated technologically. 
The storage of information in coded digital form dates to the early Upper 
Paleolithic, and with exponential increases in the size and complexity of 
human interaction networks in the postglacial epoch, the quantity of data 
stored on information technology became immense. The computational 
function of the brain also was re-created, at first with comparatively sim-
ple mechanical devices like the ancient Greek Antikythera Mechanism 
and Charles Babbage’s analytical engine of 1837.20 Powerful computing 
machines awaited developments in electronics that yielded programmable 
digital computers in the 1940s that greatly exceeded the computational 
abilities of the human brain. At the same time, other technologies have 
replicated another key function of the animal brain: receiving sensory 
input in various media (chemical, tactile, sound, and light) and transform-
ing it into coded data sets. These devices have, in turn, often been con-
nected to a computing machine to analyze the received data—for example, 
a radar early-warning system that detects fast-moving objects and identifies 
potential incoming missiles.

the vision animal        177
For biotechnology, the Upper Paleolithic background extends back 
at least to the millennia following the maximum cold of the last glacial 
(18,000 years ago). The genetic modification of canids was succeeded by 
the domestication of various plants and animals in the postglacial epoch, 
and—as during the Upper Paleolithic—progress was tied to settlement 
and reduced mobility. And as with the mechanical clock, the technology 
provided insights into natural processes; the origin and evolution of life 
eventually was incorporated into the same mechanistic worldview. Recent 
advances in biotechnology have, of course, been extraordinary, and it is 
now possible to manipulate genetic material directly to produce desired 
phenotypes (for example, genetically modified corn).
At the beginning of the twenty-first century, it is apparent that the issue 
is not the creation of life (although this is a concern for many people). It is 
the creation of a mind, or true artificial intelligence (“strong AI”), that rep-
resents the most profound potential step. After 50,000 years of growth and 
development, the mind has achieved a substantial understanding of and 
some measure of control over organic life. We can effectively imitate life, 
including a higher animal brain, with robotics and information technology, 
while genetic engineering provides opportunities for rearranging organic 
forms. It is the generative properties of the mind that remain mysterious and 
thus far impossible to replicate with technology. Perhaps these properties 
will be comprehended only if and when AI can be successfully engineered, 
which, in turn, will probably shed light on the processes and events that 
underlay the emergence of the mind in anatomically modern humans.21
But how is it possible to build a machine that might, for example, write a 
novel like Frankenstein? Alan Turing, universally regarded as the founder of 
modern computing science, famously stated that a truly intelligent machine 
would have to be able to speak or write like a human.22 AI has yet to be cre-
ated, and some have argued that it is impossible. For one thing, it implies 
mechanical consciousness, which is hard for most people to imagine. Skepti-
cism increased after earlier forecasts of an imminent breakthrough proved 
too optimistic, although some continue to predict that AI is coming; for 
example, the date proposed by Ray Kurzweil is 2045.23 If so, perhaps it will 
be achieved, as was the digital computer, only after new developments in 
other areas, such as nanotechnology, are applied to the problem.24
Because AI seems remote and quite possibly unattainable, it has not 
been an issue of much concern. Far more attention has been paid to recent 
developments in biotechnology, such as genetically modified foods and 
cloning of animals, and the current and likely future directions of this 

178        the vision animal
applied science. A small number of people have nevertheless questioned 
the potential consequences of AI. A concern is that AI could be used 
for unscrupulous purposes as an ultimate weapon of sorts.25 But another 
worry is that AI could, and perhaps inevitably would, become an inde-
pendent entity—a mind that, in Kurzweil’s words, “transcends biology.” 
Supposing the mind could free itself from its host organisms and exist in 
an entirely nonbiological form?26
To begin with, the mind would have to retain or acquire two character-
istics from its biological antecedents, rather like Mary Shelley’s creature. 
The first is a pair of hands or some other means to effect changes in its 
environment. Otherwise, it would be reduced to persuading humans to 
translate its thoughts into action. This includes the means to re-engineer 
itself: to continue progressive development. The second is motivation: the 
source of historical progress that Hegel identified as “passion” and Shaw 
described as “unreasonable.” Humans would have to create AI in their 
own image with the mechanical equivalent of hormones.
What would be the impact on humanity of an entity with vastly supe-
rior computational and perhaps even greater creative powers than our 
own? The mind could be liberated from the biological processes that pro-
duced it. It would require an energy source, but no food, water, oxygen, or 
sleep; no clothing, shelter, bed, or toilet. Among other things, the mind 
could embark on serious space exploration; unconstrained by biological 
time or the need to sustain an earthly environment, a mind could drift 
across the galaxy and beyond for millions of years. What would be the role 
of humans in such a world or, for that matter, of any life-forms? What pur-
pose would they serve? Would they not be like rats in the cellar?
In a remote future, the mind might look back on its own history in the 
same way that humans reconstruct and explain their evolution from less 
complex forms of life. It might be a little embarrassing, much as “ape” 
ancestry was for the Victorians who contemplated it in Charles Darwin’s 
time. What place would humanity occupy in the mind’s heroic account of 
its own origin? We might be viewed as simply the final, and relatively brief, 
transitional phase of a long process that began with the first information 
systems more than 500 million years ago. From this perspective, Homo 
would appear as a handy vehicle through which one of these information 
systems could assemble itself into the mind, before moving on to bigger 
and better things.

notes
1. Modernity and Infinity
1. 
Vladimir Nabokov, Speak, Memory: An Autobiography Revisited (New York: Vin-
tage, 1967), 297.
2. 
Vladimir Nabokov, Lolita (New York: Putnam, 1955).
3. 
Wild cattle or aurochs (Bos primigenius) are often depicted in cave paintings of 
Upper Paleolithic age in Europe, and the earliest of these have been directly 
dated to around 35,000 calibrated radiocarbon years ago. See, for example, Jean 
Clottes, Chauvet Cave: The Art of Earliest Times (Salt Lake City: University of Utah 
Press, 2003), 187.
4. 
Kathy Schick and Nicholas Toth, Making Silent Stones Speak: Human Evolution and 
the Dawn of Technology (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1993), 231–260; Thomas 
Wynn, “Handaxe Enigmas,” World Archaeology 27 (1995): 10–24. On the dating 
of the earliest known bifacial stone tools, see Berhane Asfaw et al., “The Earliest 
Acheulean from Konso-Gardula,” Nature 360 (1992): 732–735.
5. 
A rare and famous exception to this is the “dance” of the honeybee, which is 
performed to communicate information about food sources and potential nest 
sites to other bees. See Karl von Frisch, The Dance Language and Orientation of 
Bees (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967); and Thomas D. Seeley, 
Honeybee Democracy (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2010). See also 
Derek Bickerton, Language and Human Behavior (Seattle: University of Washing-
ton Press, 1995), 12–18.
6. 
For a definition and description of mental representation, see, for example, 
Daniel C. Dennett, Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychology 

180        1. modernity and infinity
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1978), 41–50; Fred Dretske, Explaining Behavior: 
Reasons in a World of Causes (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1988), 51–77; Hilary 
Putnam, Representation and Reality (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1988), 37–41; 
and Steven Pinker, How the Mind Works (New York: Norton, 1997), 79–88.
7. 
See, for example, Richard G. Klein, The Human Career: Human Biological and 
Cultural Origins, 3rd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009), 271–
278.
8. 
The best general reference on the evolution of the human hand is John Napier, 
Hands, rev. Russell H. Tuttle (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1993).
9. 
Leslie Aiello and Christopher Dean, An Introduction to Human Evolutionary Anat-
omy (London: Academic Press, 1990), 232–243.
10. Ibid., 232.
11. Schick and Toth, Making Silent Stones Speak, 135–140.
12. Ibid., 231–245.
13. John F. Hoffecker, “Representation and Recursion in the Archaeological 
Record,” Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 14 (2007): 370–375.
14. Ibid., 375–379.
15. Lynn Wadley, “What Is Cultural Modernity? A General View and a South African 
Perspective from Rose Cottage Cave,” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 1 (2001): 
201–221.
16. Klein, Human Career, 690.
17. Christopher Henshilwood and Curtis W. Marean, “The Origin of Modern 
Human Behavior: Critique of the Models and Their Test Implications,” Current 
Anthropology 44 (2003): 627–651.
18. Wadley, “What Is Cultural Modernity,” 207–208.
19. Noam Chomsky, On Nature and Language (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2002), 45; Marc D. Hauser, Noam Chomsky, and W. Tecumseh Fitch, 
“The Faculty of Language: What Is It, Who Has It, and How Did It Evolve?” 
Science 298 (2002): 1569–1579.
20. Noam Chomsky, Language and the Problems of Knowledge: The Managua Lectures 
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1988), 169–170. Chomsky also has applied the 
terms “recursion” and “merge” to the same phenomenon in Language and Mind, 
3rd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 183–184.
21. A recent trend in the study of language (the “principles-and-parameters model” 
and associated themes) represents a departure from traditional concerns with 
“rules” of syntax and a move toward how language is related to “systems that 
are internal to the mind.” Noam Chomsky wrote that “languages have no rules 
in anything like the familiar sense, and no theoretically significant grammatical 
constructions except as taxonomic artifacts” (The Minimalist Program [Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 1995], 5–6).
22. W. Tecumseh Fitch and Marc D. Hauser, “Computational Constraints on Syn-
tactic Processing in a Nonhuman Primate,” Science 303 (2004): 377–380.
23. Hauser, Chomsky, and Fitch wrote that “the human faculty of language appears to 
be organized like the genetic code—hierarchical, generative, recursive, and virtually 
limitless with respect to its scope of expression” (“Faculty of Language,” 1569).

1. modernity and infinity        181
24. Michael Corballis, “Recursion as the Key to the Human Mind,” in From Mating 
to Mentality: Evaluating Evolutionary Psychology, ed. Kim Sterelny and Julie Fitness 
(New York: Psychology Press, 2003), 155–171.
25. Sarnoff A. Mednick, “The Associative Basis of the Creative Process,” Psychologi-
cal Review (1962): 220–232, quoted in Andreas Kyriacou, “Innovation and Cre-
ativity: A Neuropsychological Perspective,” in Cognitive Archaeology and Human 
Evolution, ed. Sophie A. de Beaune, Frederick L. Coolidge, and Thomas Wynn 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 15–24.
26. Margaret A. Boden, The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms, 2nd ed. (London: 
Routledge, 2004), 3–6.
27. Hoffecker, “Representation and Recursion in the Archaeological Record,” 
367–376.
28. Ibid., 377–378.
29. Wind instruments (“pipes”) have been recovered from early Upper Paleolithic 
sites at Hohle Fels Cave and Giessenklosterle (both Germany) that date to 
more than 30,000 years ago. See Francesco d’Errico et al., “Archaeological Evi-
dence for the Emergence of Language, Symbolism, and Music—An Alternative 
Multidisciplinary Perspective,” Journal of World Prehistory 17 (2003): 1–70; and 
Nicholas J. Conard, Maria Malina, and Susanne C. Münzel, “New Flutes Docu-
ment the Earliest Musical Tradition in Southwestern Germany,” Nature 460 
(2009): 727–740.
30. For a summary review of technological innovations in northern Eurasia during 
this period, see John F. Hoffecker, “Innovation and Technological Knowledge in 
the Upper Paleolithic of Northern Eurasia,” Evolutionary Anthropology 14 (2005): 
186–198.
31. For definitions of “symbol” and “icon,” originally proposed by Charles Sand-
ers Peirce in 1867, see, for example, Raymond Firth, Symbols: Public and Private 
(Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1973), 60–62.
32. Francesco d’Errico, “Palaeolithic Origins of Artificial Memory Systems: An 
Evolutionary Perspective,” in Cognition and Material Culture: The Archaeology of 
Symbolic Storage, ed. Colin Renfrew and Chris Scarre (Cambridge: McDonald 
Institute for Archaeological Research, 1998), 19–50. The suggestion that some 
of these artifacts might be lunar calendars was made by Alexander Marshack, The 
Roots of Civilization: The Cognitive Beginnings of Man’s First Art, Symbol and Notation 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1972).
33. For an account of the development of the mechanical clock, see David S. Lan-
des, Revolution in Time: Clocks and the Making of the Modern World (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1983).
34. Lewis Mumford, Technics and Civilization (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1934). Many 
other authors have commented on the impact of the clock on European world-
view, including Daniel J. Boorstin, The Discoverers: A History of Man’s Search to 
Know His World and Himself (New York: Random House, 1983), 26–78; and Don-
ald Cardwell, The Norton History of Technology (New York: Norton, 1995), 37–101.
35. René Descartes, Philosophical Works, trans. Elizabeth S. Haldane and G. R. T. 
Ross (New York: Dover, 1955).

182         1. modernity and infinity
36. See, for example, Jaegwon Kim, Philosophy of Mind, 2nd ed. (Boulder, Colo.: 
Westview Press, 2006); and Keith T. Maslin, An Introduction to the Philosophy of 
Mind, 2nd ed. (Cambridge: Polity, 2007).
37. Hobbes’s comments on Descartes’s mind–body dualism were published in an 
appendix to Six Metaphysical Meditations in 1641. See Gilbert Ryle, The Concept of 
Mind (New York: Barnes & Noble, 1949).
38. Ernst Mayr, The Growth of Biological Thought: Diversity, Evolution, and Inheritance 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1982).
39. Charles Darwin, “Variation Under Domestication,” in On the Origin of Species 
(London: John Murray, 1859). 
40. Ernst Mayr and William B. Provine, eds., The Evolutionary Synthesis: Perspectives 
on the Unification of Biology (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980); 
Mayr, Growth of Biological Thought.
41. Darwin wrote that “there is no fundamental difference between man and the 
higher mammals in their mental faculties” (The Descent of Man and Selection in Rela-
tion to Sex [London: John Murray, 1871], 66). The contrasting views of Darwin and 
Wallace on the mind are discussed in Chomsky, Language and Mind, 173–185.
42. Pinker, How the Mind Works, 521.
43. The technology most likely to offer insight into the workings of the mind has not 
been developed, however. It is not the clock, the cow, or the computer, but artifi-
cial intelligence, or AI. Although the computational theory of the mind accounts 
for the metazoan brain—including humans up through the australopithecines 
and perhaps early Homo—it accounts for only part of the modern human mind. 
If “strong AI” can be engineered in the next few decades (some are skeptical that 
it can ever be done), we will, by definition, understand the principles that govern 
creativity and discrete infinity. See, for example, Ray Kurzweil, The Singularity Is 
Near: When Humans Transcend Biology (New York: Viking Press, 2005).
44. Pinker, How the Mind Works, 525. See also Jerome H. Barkow, Leda Cosmides, and 
John Tooby, eds., The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of 
Culture (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992). For a critique of the computa-
tional theory of mind, see Jerry A. Fodor, The Mind Doesn’t Work That Way: Scope 
and Limits of Computational Psychology (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000).
45. John Morgan Allman, Evolving Brains (New York: Scientific American Library, 
1999); Larry W. Swanson, Brain Architecture: Understanding the Basic Plan (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2003). For symbols in the brain, see Derek Bickerton, 
Language and Species (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 77–87.
46. Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene (New York: Oxford University Press, 1976), 
203–215.
47. The notion that the unique properties of the mind emerge from a highly com-
plex system is sometimes described as emergent materialism and has been articu-
lated by the philosopher Mario Bunge in The Mind–Body Problem: A Psychobio-
logical Approach (Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1980), and Emergence and Convergence: 
Qualitative Novelty and the Unity of Knowledge (Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press, 2003). See also Vernon B. Mountcastle, Perceptual Neuroscience: The Cere-
bral Cortex (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1998), 14–16. Chomsky 

1. modernity and infinity        183
noted that the problem posed by Descartes more than 300 years ago remains 
unaddressed and that there is still “no substantive ‘body of doctrine’ about the 
ordinary creative use of language and other manifestations” of creativity (On 
Nature and Language, 55).
48. Gerald M. Edelman, Wider Than the Sky: The Phenomenal Gift of Consciousness 
(New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2004), 14–19. Elkhonon Goldberg 
also wrote, “The human brain is the most complex natural system in the known 
universe” (The New Executive Brain: Frontal Lobes in a Complex World [Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2009], 21). See also, for example, Marvin Minsky, The 
Society of Mind (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986); and Steven Pinker and 
Jacques Mehler, Connections and Symbols (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1988).
49. Merlin Donald, Origins of the Modern Mind: Three Stages in the Evolution of Culture 
and Cognition (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1991). Throughout 
Landscape of the Mind, I have asserted that the mind “transcends biological space 
and time.” In this case, I am defining biological space and time in terms of 
individual organisms and not genomes, which are biological entities that also 
transcend the space and time of individual organisms. 
50. The dispersal of modern humans within and beyond Africa is best illustrated by 
genetic data collected from living humans. See Spencer Wells, Deep Ancestry: Inside 
the Genographic Project (Washington, D.C.: National Geographic Society, 2007).
51. Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, or the Matter, Forme and Power of a Common-wealth 
Ecclesiasticall and Civill (London: Penguin, 1968), 81.
52. William Morton Wheeler, “The Ant-Colony as an Organism,” Journal of Morphol-
ogy 22 (1911): 307–325.
53. Edward O. Wilson, The Insect Societies (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Har-
vard University Press, 1971); Bert Hölldobler and E. O. Wilson, The Super-Organ-
ism: The Beauty, Elegance, and Strangeness of Insect Societies (New York: Norton, 
2009), 10–13.
54. Hobbes, Leviathan, 226.
55. Darwin, Origin of Species, 237.
56. Hölldobler and Wilson, Super-Organism, 24–29. See also Dawkins, Selfish Gene.
57. Although reproductive biology would seem to confine eusociality to inverte-
brates, one of the few known examples outside the ants, bees, and termites is 
found among two genera of African mole-rat.
58. Richard C. Lewontin, The Genetic Basis of Evolutionary Change (New York: Colum-
bia University Press, 1974). For a recent discussion of the relevance of Lewontin’s 
findings for the dispersal of modern humans, see Wells, Deep Ancestry, 19–22.
59. Goldberg, New Executive Brain, 89–114.
60. Robin Dunbar, Grooming, Gossip, and the Evolution of Language (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1996), and “The Social Brain Hypothesis,” Evo-
lutionary Anthropology 6 (1998): 178–190.
61. Gerald M. Edelman and Giulio Tononi, A Universe of Consciousness: How Matter 
Becomes Imagination (New York: Basic Books, 2000), 103.
62. Ibid., 193–199. Edelman and Tononi also wrote, “Once higher-order con-
sciousness begins to emerge, a self can be constructed from social and affective  

184         1. modernity and infinity
relationships. This self . . . goes far beyond the biologically based individuality of 
an animal with primary consciousness” (193).
63. Carl Mitcham, Thinking Through Technology: The Path Between Engineering and Phi-
losophy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994), 20–24.
64. Ibid., 29–33. See also Carl Mitcham and Robert Mackey, “Introduction: Tech-
nology as a Philosophical Problem,” in Philosophy and Technology: Readings in the 
Philosophical Problems of Technology, ed. Carl Mitcham and Robert Mackey (New 
York: Free Press, 1983), 22–25.
65. Martin Heidegger, “The Question Concerning Technology,” in The Question 
Concerning Technology and Other Essays, trans. William Lovitt (New York: Harper 
& Row, 1977), 5–30. The concept or theory of embodied cognition, developed in 
the field of psychology, is explicitly based on Heidegger’s philosophy. See, for 
example, Michael L. Anderson, “Embodied Cognition: A Field Guide,” Artificial 
Intelligence 149 (2003): 91–30. Anderson summed up one of his colleague’s views 
thusly: “[R]epresentations are therefore ‘sublimations’ of bodily experience, pos-
sessed of content already, and not given content or form by an autonomous 
mind” (104). In my view, embodied cognition would not survive an encounter 
with the archaeological record, which contains abundant evidence for external 
representations that have no basis in bodily experience, beginning probably with 
bifaces and including much of the geometric urban “landscape of the mind.”
66. Samuel Butler, “Darwin Among the Machines,” in The Shrewsbury Edition 
of the Works of Samuel Butler, ed. Henry Festing Jones (London: Cape, 1923), 
1:208–210. Butler’s ideas about mechanical life (as well as those of Hobbes) are 
described in George B. Dyson’s remarkable book Darwin Among the Machines: 
The Evolution of Global Intelligence (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1997).
67. Jane Goodall, In the Shadow of Man (London: Collins, 1971).
68. David L. Clarke, Analytical Archaeology, 2nd ed. (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1978), 181.
69. Robert Pool, Beyond Engineering: How Society Shapes Technology (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1997), 119.
70. Schick and Toth, Making Silent Stones Speak, 130–133.
71. Hoffecker, “Representation and Recursion in the Archaeological Record,” 
380–381.
72. See, for example, Cordelia Fine, ed., The Britannica Guide to the Brain (London: 
Constable and Robinson, 2008), 73–86.
73. Bruce G. Trigger, A History of Archaeological Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1989).
74. V. Gordon Childe, Society and Knowledge: The Growth of Human Traditions (New 
York: Harper, 1956), 1.
75. Heidegger, “Question Concerning Technology,” 5.
76. See, for example, Trigger, History of Archaeological Thought, 264–328; and Ian 
Hodder, Reading the Past: Current Approaches to Interpretation in Archaeology, 2nd 
ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), 19–34.
77. See, for example, Ian Hodder, “Theoretical Archaeology: A Reactionary View,” 

1. modernity and infinity        185
in Symbolic and Structural Archaeology, ed. Ian Hodder (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1981), 12–13.
78. Colin Renfrew, Towards an Archaeology of Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1982). See also Colin Renfrew, “What Is Cognitive Archaeology?” 
Cambridge Archaeological Journal 3 (1993): 247–270.
79. Donald, Origins of the Modern Mind. Donald probably was unaware that simi-
lar ideas had been discussed several decades earlier by the French archaeologist 
André Leroi-Gourhan, who wrote that “la mémoire de l’homme est extériorisée 
et son contenant est la collectivité ethnique” (Le Geste et la parole, vol. 2, La 
mémoire et les rythmes [Paris: Albin Michel, 1965], 64). For a translation, see André 
Leroi-Gourhan, Gesture and Speech, trans. Anna  Bostock Berger (Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 1993).
80. Colin Renfrew and Chris Scarre, eds., Cognition and Material Culture: The Archae-
ology of Symbolic Storage (Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeological 
Research, 1998); Elizabeth DeMarrais, Chris Gosden, and Colin Renfrew, eds., 
Rethinking Materiality: The Engagement of Mind with the Material World (Cambridge: 
McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, 2004). See also de Beaune, 
Coolidge, and Wynn, eds., Cognitive Archaeology and Human Evolution.
81. See, for example, Thomas Wynn, “Tools, Grammar and the Archaeology of Cog-
nition,” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 1 (1991): 191–206; and Colin Renfrew, 
“Cognitive Archaeology,” in Archaeology: The Key Concepts, ed. Colin Renfrew 
and Paul Bahn (Abingdon: Routledge, 2005), 41–45.
82. See, for example, Claude Lévi-Strauss, Structural Anthropology, trans. Claire Jacob-
son and Brooke Grundfest Schoepf (New York: Basic Books, 1963); Edmund 
Leach, Claude Lévi-Strauss (New York: Viking Press, 1970); and Jean Piaget, Struc-
turalism, trans. Chaninah Maschler (New York: Harper & Row, 1970).
83. Nathan Schlanger, “The Chaîne Opératoire,” in Archaeology, ed. Renfrew and 
Bahn, 25–31. See also Leroi-Gourhan, Gesture and Speech, 231–235.
84. Stanley H. Ambrose, “Paleolithic Technology and Human Evolution,” Science 
291 (2001): 1748–1753; Jacques Pelegrin, “Cognition and the Emergence of 
Language: A Contribution from Lithic Technology,” in Cognitive Archaeology and 
Human Evolution, ed. de Beaune, Coolidge, and Wynn, 95–108.
85. Steven Mithen, The Prehistory of the Mind: The Cognitive Origins of Art, Religion and 
Science (London: Thames and Hudson, 1996).
86. Hoffecker, “Representation and Recursion in the Archaeological Record,” 
370–375.
87. Gordon W. Hewes, “A History of Speculation on the Relation Between Tools 
and Language,” in Tools, Language and Cognition in Human Evolution, ed. Kath-
leen R. Gibson and Tim Ingold (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 
20–31.
88. Ralph Holloway, “Culture: A Human Domain,” Current Anthropology 10 (1969): 
395–412.
89. James Deetz, Invitation to Archaeology (Garden City, N.Y.: Natural History Press, 
1967), 81–101; Glynn Ll. Isaac, “Stages of Cultural Elaboration in the Pleistocene:  

186         1. modernity and infinity
Possible Archaeological Indicators of the Development of Language Capabili-
ties,” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 280 (1976): 275–288.
90. Thomas Wynn, a leading cognitive archaeologist, has been consistently skepti-
cal of the parallels between language and toolmaking, stressing the differences 
over the similarities in “Tools, Grammar and the Archaeology of Cognition,” 
and “The Evolution of Tools and Symbolic Behavior,” in Handbook of Human 
Symbolic Evolution, ed. Andrew Lock and Charles R. Peters (Oxford: Blackwell, 
1999), 269–271. The “modular model” of the mind was initially presented in 
Jerry A. Fodor, The Modularity of Mind (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1983). It 
has had an impact on evolutionary psychology; see, for example, Leda Cosmides 
and John Tooby, “Origins of Domain Specificity: The Evolution of Functional 
Organization,” in Mapping the Mind: Domain Specificity in Cognition and Culture, 
ed. Lawrence A. Hirschfield and Susan A. Gelman (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1994), 85–116. For a discussion of the modular model of the 
mind in the context of cognitive archaeology, see Mithen, Prehistory of the Mind, 
37–60.
91. Patricia M. Greenfield, “Language, Tools, and Brain: The Ontogeny and Phy-
logeny of Hierarchically Organized Sequential Behavior,” Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences 14 (1991): 531–595.
92. Goldberg wrote that “the mental representation of a thing is not modular. It is 
distributed, since its different sensory components are represented in different 
parts of the cortex” (New Executive Brain, 54).
93. Karen Emmorey, Sonya Mehta, and Thomas J. Grabowski, “The Neural Cor-
relates of Sign Versus Word Production,” NeuroImage 36 (2007): 202–208.
94. Klein, Human Career, 647–649; Frederick L. Coolidge and Thomas Wynn, 
“Working Memory, Its Executive Functions, and the Emergence of Modern 
Thinking,” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 15 (2005): 5–26.
95. Wolfgang Enard et al., “Molecular Evolution of FOXP2, a Gene Involved in 
Speech and Language,” Nature 418 (2002): 869–872.
2. Daydreams of the Lower Paleolithic
1. 
Thomas Wynn, “Piaget, Stone Tools and the Evolution of Human Intelligence,” 
World Archaeology 17 (1985): 32–43; John A. J. Gowlett, “The Elements of Design 
Form in Acheulian Bifaces: Modes, Modalities, Rules and Language,” in Axe Age: 
Acheulian Tool-making from Quarry to Discard, ed. Naama Goren-Inbar and Gonen 
Sharon (London: Equinox, 2006), 203–221. The term “mental template” was 
introduced by the American archaeologist James Deetz, Invitation to Archaeology 
(Garden City, N.Y.: Natural History Press, 1967), 45–49. 
2. 
See, for example, Thomas Wynn, “The Evolution of Tools and Symbolic Behav-
iour,” in Handbook of Human Symbolic Evolution, ed. Andrew Lock and Charles R. 
Peters (Oxford: Blackwell, 1999), 269.
3. 
Bifaces flaked from bone have been recovered from Lower Paleolithic sites in 
Italy and Germany. See Paola Villa, “Middle Pleistocene Prehistory in South-
western Europe: The State of Our Knowledge and Ignorance,” Journal of Anthro-
pological Research 47 (1991): 193–217; and Ursula Mania, “The Utilisation of 

2. daydreams of the lower paleolithic        187
Large Mammal Bones in Bilzingsleben—A Special Variant of Middle Pleistocene 
Man’s Relationship to His Environment,” ERAUL 62 (1995): 239–246. 
4. 
See, for example, Philip V. Tobias, The Brain in Hominid Evolution (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1971), 106–108; and Vernon B. Mountcastle,  
Perceptual Neuroscience: The Cerebral Cortex (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1998), 20–23. 
5. 
David Marr, Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation 
and Processing of Visual Information (San Francisco: Freeman, 1982).
6. 
Richard G. Klein, The Human Career: Human Biological and Cultural Origins, 3rd 
ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009), 103. 
7. 
John Morgan Allman, Evolving Brains (New York: Scientific American Library, 
1999), 2–3. 
8. 
Ibid., 3–8. See also Larry W. Swanson, Brain Architecture: Understanding the Basic 
Plan (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), 11–14. A seminal reference on the 
early evolution of the brain is G. H. Parker, The Elementary Nervous System (Phila-
delphia: Lippincott, 1919). 
9. 
Thomas Suddendorf, Donna Rose Addis, and Michael C. Corballis, “Mental 
Time Travel and the Shaping of the Human Mind,” Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society B 364 (2009): 1317–1324.
10. Swanson, Brain Architecture, 16–26; Allman, Evolving Brains, 9–13. See also Rich-
ard Dawkins, The Ancestor’s Tale: A Pilgrimage to the Dawn of Evolution (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 2004), 463–476. 
11. Derek Bickerton, Language and Species (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1990), 77–87. 
12. Mario F. Wulliman, “Brain Phenotypes and Early Regulatory Genes: The Bau-
plan of the Metazoan Central Nervous System,” in Brain Evolution and Cogni-
tion, ed. Gerhard Roth and Mario F. Wulliman (New York: Wiley, 2001), 11–40; 
Swanson, Brain Architecture, 29–38. A general source on invertebrate brains is 
Theodore Holmes Bullock and G. Adrian Horridge, Structure and Function in the 
Nervous Systems of Invertebrates (San Francisco: Freeman, 1965). 
13. Allman, Evolving Brains, 68–73. 
14. Matthew H. Nitecki, ed., Evolutionary Innovations (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1990). 
15. C. Gans and G. Northcutt, “Neural Crest and the Origin of the Vertebrates: A 
New Head,” Science 220 (1983): 268–274; Allman, Evolving Brains, 73–79; Swan-
son, Brain Architecture, 40–79. 
16. Allman, Evolving Brains, 75–78. 
17. Dawkins, Ancestor’s Tale, 293–319. 
18. Allman, Evolving Brains, 92–106. 
19. Mountcastle, Perceptual Neuroscience, 19–25; Georg F. Striedter, Principles of Brain 
Evolution (Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer, 2005), 255–296.
20. Glenn C. Conroy, Primate Evolution (New York: Norton, 1990). 
21. Striedter, Principles of Brain Evolution, 303–304.
22. Robin Dunbar, “The Social-Brain Hypothesis,” Evolutionary Anthropology 6 
(1998): 178–190. 

188         2. daydreams of the lower paleolithic
23. Allman, Evolving Brains, 122–157; Streidter, Principles of Brain Evolution, 305–310.
24. Allman, Evolving Brains, 143–146; Streidter, Principles of Brain Evolution, 301–305.
25. Robert Martin, Primate Origins and Evolution: A Phylogenetic Reconstruction (Prince-
ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1990). It has been noted that tree squirrels 
possess laterally placed eyes, which seems to undercut the arboreal theory; despite 
the placement of their eyes, however, there is some overlap in their fields of vision. 
26. Matt Cartmill, “Rethinking Primate Origins,” Science 184 (1974): 436–443. 
27. Allman, Evolving Brains, 144–146. 
28. W. E. Le Gros Clark, History of the Primates (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1959), 45–53.
29. Allman, Evolving Brains, 146–149. 
30. See, for example, Steven Pinker, How the Mind Works (New York: Norton, 1997), 
213–214. 
31. Marr, Vision, 3–6.
32. Michael C. Corballis, The Lopsided Ape: Evolution of the Generative Mind (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1991), 218–222. 
33. Marr, Vision, 37, table 1-1.
34. In this context, music—especially the complex musical structures developed by 
composers like Mozart and Bach—becomes a particularly striking creative prod-
uct of the mind. Most of the material structures generated by the mind appear to 
have a logical basis in (restructured) natural visual representations. But complex 
sound structures seem to lack such a “natural” basis. Natural sounds tend to 
blend and are difficult to represent spatially in the brain with precision; accord-
ingly, the artificial sounds produced by musical instruments are to a significant 
degree structured temporally. See Daniel J. Levitin, This Is Your Brain on Music: 
The Science of a Human Obsession (New York: Penguin, 2006). 
35. Conroy, Primate Evolution, 200–248; Klein, Human Career, 112–119. 
36. For an excellent account of Proconsul aimed at the general reader, see Alan 
Walker and Pat Shipman, The Ape in the Tree: An Intellectual and Natural History of 
Proconsul (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2005). 
See also Chris Stringer and Peter Andrews, The Complete World of Human Evolu-
tion (New York: Thames and Hudson, 2005), 92–95. 
37. Klein, Human Career, 119–127. Brain volume for Dryopithecus has been estimated 
on the basis of a cranium recovered from Rudabánya (Hungary). 
38. Ian Tattersall, The Fossil Trail: How We Know What We Think We Know About 
Human Evolution (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995), 3–4. 
39. Roger Lewin and Robert A. Foley, Principles of Human Evolution (Malden, Mass.: 
Blackwell, 2004), 210–212. 
40. Russell H. Tuttle, Apes of the World: Their Social Behavior, Communication, Mental-
ity and Ecology (Park Ridge, N.J.: Noyes, 1986); William McGrew, The Cultured 
Chimpanzee: Reflections on Cultural Primatology (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2004). Recent analysis of 4.4-million-year-old fossils assigned to Ardipi-
thecus seem to confirm that early humans “never knuckle-walked.” See Tim D. 
White et al., “Ardipithecus ramidus and the Paleobiology of Early Hominids,” Sci-
ence 326 (2009): 75–86. 

2. daydreams of the lower paleolithic        189
41. Charles Darwin, On the Origin of Species (London: John Murray, 1859), 279–311. 
42. Niles Eldredge, Time Frames: The Evolution of Punctuated Equilibria (Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1985). 
43. Views regarding the cognitive powers of chimpanzees and the other great apes 
vary widely. A number of primatologists believe that apes evolved their own 
unique level of cognition—including “generativity, and cognitive fluidity as well 
as . . . mental representation of absent items, perspective taking, cooperative 
hunting, food sharing, and symbolic communication”—that provided an essen-
tial context for the emergence of the human mind. See Anne E. Russon and 
David R. Begun, “Evolutionary Origins of Great Ape Intelligence: An Integrated 
View,” in The Evolution of Thought: Evolutionary Origins of Great Ape Intelligence, 
ed. Anne E. Russon and David R. Begun (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2004), 353–368. A more cautious approach has been pursued by Daniel 
Povinelli and his students, who base their conclusions on a series of controlled 
experiments designed to reveal knowledge among apes through object manipu-
lation and problem solving; they concluded that chimpanzees are incapable of 
forming concepts about entities that they cannot observe directly. See Daniel J. 
Povinelli, Folk Physics for Apes: The Chimpanzee’s Theory of How the World Works 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000). 
44. Peter S. Rodman and Henry M. McHenry, “Bioenergetics and the Origin of 
Hominid Bipedalism,” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 52 (1980): 
103–106. 
45. Klein, Human Career, 271–278. 
46. Lewin and Foley, Principles of Human Evolution, 241–253.
47. John H. Langdon, The Human Strategy: An Evolutionary Perspective on Human Anat-
omy (New York: Oxford University Press, 2005), 116–128.
48. Jonathan Kingdon, Lowly Origin: Where, When, and Why Our Ancestors First Stood 
Up (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2003), 118–147. 
49. Michel Brunet et al., “A New Hominid from the Upper Miocene of Chad, Cen-
tral Africa,” Nature 418 (2002): 145–801. See also Bernard Wood, Human Evolu-
tion: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 63–65. 
50. K. Galik et al., “External and Internal Morphology of the BAR 1002’00 Orrorin 
tugenensis Femur,” Science 305 (2004): 1450–1453. 
51. Wood, Human Evolution, 65–67.
52. Tim D. White, Gen Suwa, and Berhane Asfaw, “Australopithecus ramidus, a New 
Species of Early Hominid from Aramis, Ethiopia,” Nature 371 (1994): 306–312. 
The classification of these fossils was subsequently revised to the genus Ardipithe-
cus. See White et al., “Ardipithecus ramidus and the Paleobiology of Early Homi-
nids,” 80–81. 
53. Meave  G. Leakey et al., “New Four-Million-Year-Old Hominid Species from 
Kanapoi and Allia Bay, Kenya,” Nature 376 (1995): 565–571. 
54. Lewin and Foley, Principles of Human Evolution, 261–262.
55. Randall L. Susman, Jack T. Stern, and William J. Jungers, “Locomotor Adapta-
tions in the Hadar Hominids,” in Ancestors: The Hard Evidence, ed. Eric Delson 
(New York: Liss, 1985), 184–192.

190         2. daydreams of the lower paleolithic
56. There are four major references on the hand. The earliest is Charles Bell, The 
Hand: Its Mechanism and Vital Endowments as Evincing Design (New York: Harper, 
1840). The second is John Napier, Hands, rev. Russell H. Tuttle (New York: Pan-
theon Books, 1980; Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1993). The third 
is Frank R. Wilson, The Hand: How Its Use Shapes the Brain, Language, and Human 
Culture (New York: Pantheon Books, 1998). The most recent source, with emphasis 
on neuroanatomy, is Vernon B. Mountcastle, The Sensory Hand: Neural Mecha-
nisms of Somatic Sensation (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2005). 
57. Mountcastle, Sensory Hand, 35–36. 
58. Ibid., 41–44. 
59. Ibid., 1–6. 
60. Napier, Hands, 55.
61. The length of the thumb × 100 / length of the index finger = the opposability 
index, which is 60 for living humans. See ibid., 57–58. 
62. Ibid., 61–63. 
63. John Napier, “The Evolution of the Hand,” Scientific American 207 (1962): 
56–62, and Hands, 29–38. 
64. Napier, Hands, 62; Mountcastle, Sensory Hand, 38–40.
65. Napier, Hands, 73–74. 
66. Ibid., 57–58.
67. Walker and Shipman, Ape in the Tree, 74–75. 
68. Salvador Moyà-Solà and Meike Köhler, “A Dryopithecus Skeleton and the Origin 
of Great-Ape Locomotion,” Nature 379 (1996): 156–159; Lewin and Foley, Prin-
ciples of Human Evolution, 219–220.
69. Napier, Hands, 67–77.
70. White et al., “Ardipithecus ramidus and the Paleobiology of Early Hominids,” 80–81. 
71. Michael E. Bush et al., “Hominid Carpal, Metacarpal, and Phalangeal Bones 
Recovered from the Hadar Formation: 1974–1977 Collections,” American Journal 
of Physical Anthropology 57 (1982): 651–677. 
72. Mary W. Marzke, “Joint Functions and Grips of the Australopithecus afarensis Hand, 
with Special Reference to the Region of the Capitate,” Journal of Human Evolution 
12 (1983): 197–211. See also Leslie Aiello and Christopher Dean, An Introduction 
to Human Evolutionary Anatomy (London: Academic Press, 1990), 385–388.
73. John Napier, “Fossil Hand Bones from Olduvai Gorge,” Nature 196 (1962): 
409–411, and Hands, 88–89; Aiello and Dean, Introduction to Human Evolution-
ary Anatomy, 389–392. The hand bones include three carpals, eleven phalanges, 
and one metacarpal fragment from Olduvai Hominid 7 assigned to Homo habilis 
from Bed I at Olduvai Gorge. 
74. Randall L. Susman, “Hand of Paranthropus robustus from Member 1, Swartkrans: 
Fossil Evidence for Tool Behavior,” Science 240 (1988): 781–784. 
75. Klein, Human Career, 259–261.
76. Alan Walker and Richard E. Leakey, “The Postcranial Bones,” in The Nari-
okotome Homo erectus Skeleton, ed. Alan Walker and Richard E. Leakey (Berlin: 
Springer, 1993), 136–138. The bones include two first metacarpal shafts (?) and 
two phalanges. 

2. daydreams of the lower paleolithic        191
77. John F. Hoffecker, “Representation and Recursion in the Archaeological 
Record,” Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 14 (2007): 359–387. 
78. See, for example, Kathy Schick and Nicholas Toth, Making Silent Stones Speak: 
Human Evolution and the Dawn of Technology (New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1993), 227–237. The term “Oldowan” is derived from Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania.
79. Sileshi Semaw, “The Oldest Stone Artifacts from Gona (2.6–2.5 Ma), Afar, Ethi-
opia: Implications for Understanding the Earliest Stages of Stone Knapping,” 
in The Oldowan: Case Studies into the Earliest Stone Age, ed. Nicholas Toth and 
Kathy Schick (Gosport, Ind.: Stone Age Institute Press, 2006), 43–75. The term 
“Acheulean” is derived from Saint-Acheul in France.
80. See, for example, Mary D. Leakey, Olduvai Gorge, vol. 3, Excavations in Beds I 
and II, 1960–1963 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971). The volume 
describes and illustrates stone artifacts of Oldowan and Acheulean assemblages. 
Note that some artifacts classified as “proto-bifaces” of the Oldowan are fully 
bifacially flaked (for example, fig. 51[2] on p. 101), while some artifacts classified 
as “bifaces” of the succeeding Acheulean are only partially bifacially flaked (for 
example, fig. 63 on p. 129). 
81. Bifaces do not appear outside Africa until about 1.4 million years ago, and they 
remain rare or absent in many parts of Eurasia during the Lower Paleolithic, 
especially in the Far East and eastern Europe. As far as we know, the economy of 
humans inhabiting these places (chiefly Homo erectus) was similar to that of humans 
living in Africa and western Europe, and they apparently used Oldowan tools to 
perform the same function(s) as large bifacial tools. See, for example, Noel T. Boaz 
and Russell L. Ciochon, Dragon Bone Hill: An Ice-Age Saga of Homo erectus (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2004), 95–107. For the analysis of microscopic wear pat-
terns on hand axes, see Lawrence H. Keeley, “Microwear Analysis of Lithics,” in 
The Lower Paleolithic Site at Hoxne, England, ed. Ronald Singer, Bruce G. Gladfelter, 
and John J. Wymer (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), 129–138. Micro-
scopic use-wear (almost entirely attributed to meat and bone polish from butchery) 
was identified on roughly forty bifaces from Boxgrove (England), as discussed in 
Michael Pitts and Mark Roberts, Fairweather Eden: Life in Britain Half a Million Years 
Ago as Revealed by the Excavations at Boxgrove (London: Century, 1998), 285–287. 
82. Semaw, “Oldest Stone Artifacts from Gona,” 68–69.
83. Kathy Schick and Nicholas Toth, “An Overview of the Oldowan Industrial Com-
plex: The Sites and the Nature of Their Evidence,” in Oldowan, ed. Toth and 
Schick, 18. Remains of Homo are associated with Oldowan artifacts at Hadar 
(Ethiopia), Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania), and Swartkrans (South Africa). 
84. Nicholas Toth et al., “Pan the Toolmaker: Investigations into the Stone Tool-
Making and Tool-Using Capabilities of a Bonobo (Pan paniscus),” Journal of 
Archaeological Science 20 (1993): 81–91; Nicholas Toth, Kathy Schick, and Sileshi 
Semaw, “A Comparative Study of the Stone Tool-Making Skills of Pan, Australo-
pithecus, and Homo sapiens,” in Oldowan, ed. Toth and Schick, 155–222. 
85. Schick and Toth, “Overview of the Oldowan Industrial Complex,” 28–29. 
86. R. X. Zhu et al., “Early Evidence of the Genus Homo in East Asia,” Journal of 
Human Evolution 55 (2008): 1075–1085.

192         2. daydreams of the lower paleolithic
87. Schick and Toth, “Overview of the Oldowan Industrial Complex,” 9–10. 
88. Leakey, Olduvai Gorge.
89. Nicholas Toth, “The Oldowan Reassessed: A Close Look at Early Stone Arti-
facts,” Journal of Archaeological Science 12 (1985): 101–120. See also Schick and 
Toth, “Overview of the Oldowan Industrial Complex,” 5–9. 
90. Schick and Toth, “Overview of the Oldowan Industrial Complex,” 9–10; Klein, 
Human Career, 252–259. 
91. See, for example, Richard Potts and Pat Shipman, “Cutmarks Made by Stone 
Tools on Bones from Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania,” Nature 291 (1981): 577–580; 
and Henry T. Bunn and Ellen M. Kroll, “Systematic Butchery by Plio/Pleisto-
cene Hominids at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania,” Current Anthropology 27 (1986): 
431–452. 
92. Lawrence H. Keeley and Nicholas Toth, “Microwear Polishes on Early Stone 
Tools from Koobi Fora, Kenya,” Nature 293 (1981): 464–466. 
93. Manuel Domínguez-Rodrigo and Travis Rayne Pickering, “Early Hominid Hunt-
ing and Scavenging: A Zooarchaeological Review,” Evolutionary Anthropology 12 
(2003): 275–282. 
94. Klein, Human Career, 157–160. 
95. Potts and Shipman, “Cutmarks Made by Stone Tools on Bones from Olduvai 
Gorge, Tanzania.”
96. Leakey, Olduvai Gorge, 1–3. Leakey defined the Acheulean assemblages at Oldu-
vai Gorge as those containing at least 40 percent bifaces among the tools. 
97. Berhane Asfaw et al., “The Earliest Acheulean from Konso-Gardula,” Nature 360 
(1992): 732–735; Klein, Human Career, 373–381.
98. Toth, “Oldowan Reassessed,” 101–120.
99. Leakey, Olduvai Gorge, 21–123. The most likely candidate for an Oldowan arti-
fact based on a mental template would seem to be those classified as “spheroids,” 
which Leakey described as “stone balls, smoothly rounded over the whole exterior” 
(6). On the basis of experiments, Schick and Toth concluded that these probably 
represent heavily battered hammerstones: “[A]fter approximately four hours of 
percussion these quartz hammers assumed a remarkably spherical shape without 
any necessary intent or predetermination” (Making Silent Stones Speak, 130–133). 
100. If there is some debate about the implications of other developments in Paleo-
lithic technology for human cognitive faculties (for example, Levallois prepared 
cores), there is near consensus on the biface as a “mental template,” including 
among archaeologists of the cognitive variety. See, for example, Steven Mithen, 
The Prehistory of the Mind: The Cognitive Origins of Art and Science (London: Thames 
and Hudson, 1996), 117–119; Jacques Pelegrin, “Cognition and the Emergence 
of Language: A Contribution from Lithic Technology,” in Cognitive Archaeol-
ogy and Human Evolution, ed. Sophie A. de Beaune, Frederick L. Coolidge, and 
Thomas Wynn (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), 100–102; and 
Frederick L. Coolidge and Thomas Wynn, The Rise of Homo sapiens: The Evolution 
of Modern Thinking (Malden, Mass.: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009), 110–113. An alter-
native view was expressed by William Noble and Iain Davidson: “The repeated 
forms of stone artefacts such as handaxes seem likely to be the result of learned 

2. daydreams of the lower paleolithic        193
motor actions rather than deliberate design or ‘planned’ attempts to reproduce 
a ‘mental template’ of the ideal form” (Human Evolution, Language and Mind: A 
Psychological and Archaeological Inquiry [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1996], 200). 
101. H. Roche et al., “Early Hominid Stone Tool Production and Technical Skill 2.34 
Myr Ago in West Turkana, Kenya,” Nature 399 (1999): 57–60. See also Pelegrin, 
“Cognition and the Emergence of Language,” 98–100.
102. PET scans done of human subjects as they flake stone indicate activation of 
brain areas associated with both motor activities and multimodal sensory inputs: 
“vision, touch, and proprioception, or sense of body position and motion” (Die-
trich Stout et al., “Stone Tool-Making and Brain Activation: Positron Emission 
Tomography [PET] Studies,” Journal of Archaeological Science 27 [2000]: 1215). See 
also Dietrich Stout and Thierry Chaminde, “The Evolutionary Neuroscience of 
Tool Making,” Neuropsychologia 45 (2007): 1091–1100. For a discussion of the 
potential importance of “talking to oneself” to the evolution of consciousness 
and thinking, see Daniel C. Dennett, Consciousness Explained (Boston: Little, 
Brown,  1991), 193–226. 
103. Gowlett, “Elements of Design Form in Acheulian Bifaces.”
104. Schick and Toth, Making Silent Stones Speak, 258–260; Keeley, “Microwear Analy-
sis of Lithics,” 135–137. 
105. William H. Calvin, “The Unitary Hypothesis: A Common Neural Circuitry for 
Novel Manipulations, Language, Plan-Ahead, and Throwing?” in Tools, Language, 
and Cognition in Human Evolution, ed. Kathleen R. Gibson and Tim Ingold (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 230–250. 
106. Alan Walker and Pat Shipman, The Wisdom of the Bones: In Search of Human Ori-
gins (New York: Knopf, 1996). 
107. Robert L. Kelly, The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in Hunter-Gatherer Lifeways (Wash-
ington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1995). 
108. Christoph. M. Monahan, “New Zooarchaeological Data from Bed II, Olduvai 
Gorge, Tanzania: Implications for Hominid Behavior in the Early Pleistocene,” 
Journal of Human Evolution 31 (1996): 93–128.
109. See, for example, Arthur J. Jelinek, “The Lower Paleolithic: Current Evidence 
and Interpretation,” Annual Review of Anthropology 6 (1977): 11–32; and Pitts and 
Roberts, Fairweather Eden, 287. 
110. David Lordkipanidze et al., “Postcranial Evidence from Early Homo from Dma-
nisi, Georgia,” Nature 449 (2007): 305–310. 
111. For example, Grahame Clark, World Prehistory in New Perspective (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1977), 30. 
112. John R. Searle, The Mind: A Brief Introduction (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2004), 19. 
113. The late J. Desmond Clark is quoted as suggesting that the communications of 
the biface-makers probably resembled the bifaces: “the same things over and over 
and over again” (Schick and Toth, Making Silent Stones Speak, 280). 
114. See, for example, John Wymer, Lower Palaeolithic Archaeology in Britain as Repre-
sented by the Thames Valley (London: Baker, 1968), 46–60. 

194         2. daydreams of the lower paleolithic
115. François Bordes, Typologie du Paléolithique ancient et moyen (Bordeaux: Imprimer-
ies Delmas, 1961); Derek Roe, “British Lower and Middle Palaeolithic Handaxe 
Groups,” Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 34 (1968): 245–267; P. Callow, “The 
Lower and Middle Palaeolithic of Britain and Adjacent Areas of Europe” (Ph.D. 
diss., Cambridge University, 1976). 
116. Glynn Ll. Isaac, Olorgesailie: Archeological Studies of a Middle Pleistocene Lake Basin 
in Kenya (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1977), 116–145. 
117. Shannon P. McPherron, “What Typology Can Tell Us About Acheulian Han-
daxe Production,” in Axe Age, ed. Goren-Inbar and Sharon, 267–285.
118. Ofer Bar-Yosef and Anna Belfer-Cohen, “From Africa to Eurasia—Early Disper-
sals,” Quaternary International 75 (2001): 19–28. The earliest dated occurrence 
of bifaces in North Africa seems to be at Casablanca (Morocco), where early 
Acheulean artifacts of quartzite and flint date to about a million years ago. See 
Jean-Paul Raynal et al., “The Earliest Occupation of North-Africa: The Moroc-
can Perspective,” Quaternary International 75 (2001): 68–69. 
119. G. Philip Rightmire, “Human Evolution in the Middle Pleistocene: The Role of 
Homo heidelbergensis,” Evolutionary Anthropology 6 (1998): 218–227. 
120. For example, Klein, Human Career, 330–343. 
121. Bar-Yosef and Belfer-Cohen, “From Africa to Eurasia,” 24. 
122. Manuel Santonja and Paola Villa, “The Acheulean of Western Europe,” in 
Axe Age, ed. Goren-Inbar and Sharon, 429–478. Bifaces are reported from 
Notarchirico (southern Italy) in deposits that underlie a volcanic tephra dating 
to 640,000 years ago. 
123. Michael D. Petraglia, “The Lower Palaeolithic of India and Its Bearing on the 
Asian Record,” in Early Human Behaviour in Global Context: The Rise and Diversity 
of the Lower Paleolithic Record, ed. Michael D. Petraglia and Ravi Korisettar (Lon-
don: Routledge, 1998), 343–390. 
124. Thomas Wynn and Forrest Tierson, “Regional Comparison of the Shapes of 
Later Acheulean Handaxes,” American Anthropologist 92 (1990): 73–84. 
3. Modern Humans and the Super-Brain
1. 
Richard G. Klein, The Human Career: Human Biological and Cultural Origins, 3rd 
ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009).
2. 
Francesco d’Errico et al., “Archaeological Evidence for the Emergence of Lan-
guage, Symbolism, and Music—An Alternative Multidisciplinary Perspective,” 
Journal of World Prehistory 17 (2003): 1–70.
3. 
John F. Hoffecker, “Innovation and Technological Knowledge in the Upper 
Paleolithic of Northern Eurasia,” Evolutionary Anthropology 14 (2005): 186–
198.
4. 
Christopher S. Henshilwood and Curtis W. Marean, “The Origin of Modern 
Behavior: Critique of the Models and Their Test Implications,” Current Anthro-
pology 44 (2003): 627–651.
5. 
Lyn Wadley, “What Is Cultural Modernity? A General View and a South African 
Perspective from Rose Cottage Cave,” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 1 (2001): 
201–221. The concept of material “storage of symbols” was introduced in Merlin 

3. modern humans and the super-brain        195
Donald, Origins of the Modern Mind: Three Stages in the Evolution of Culture and 
Cognition (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1991).
6. 
Noam Chomsky, On Nature and Language (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2002), 45–46; Michael Corballis, “Recursion as the Key to the Human 
Mind,” in From Mating to Mentality: Evaluating Evolutionary Psychology, ed. Kim 
Sterelny and Julie Fitness (New York: Psychology Press, 2003), 155–171.
7. 
According to Steven Pinker, “As far as biological cause and effect are concerned, 
music is useless. It shows no signs of design for attaining a goal such as long life, 
grandchildren, or accurate perception and prediction of the world” (How the 
Mind Works [New York: Norton, 1997], 528).
8. 
Claude Lévi-Strauss, The Raw and the Cooked: Introduction to a Science of Mythology, 
trans. John Weightman and Doreen Weightman (New York: Harper & Row, 
1966), 1:18–19. Lévi-Strauss noted that while painters draw on natural color, 
“there are no musical sounds in nature.”
9. 
d’Errico et al., “Archaeological Evidence for the Emergence of Language, Sym-
bolism, and Music.”
10. See, for example, William Noble and Iain Davidson, “The Evolutionary Emer-
gence of Modern Human Behaviour: Language and Its Archaeology,” Man 26 
(1991): 223–253; and Paul Mellars, The Neanderthal Legacy: An Archaeological Per-
spective from Western Europe (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1996), 
387–419.
11. Noam Chomsky, The Minimalist Program (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press), and On 
Nature and Language, 92–161.
12. Klein, Human Career, 514–517; Frederick L. Coolidge and Thomas Wynn, 
“Working Memory, Its Executive Functions, and the Emergence of Modern 
Thinking,” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 15 (2005): 5–26.
13. Stanley H. Ambrose, “Late Pleistocene Human Population Bottlenecks, Volca-
nic Winter, and Differentiation of Modern Humans,”  Journal of Human Evolu-
tion  34 (1998): 623–651.
14. John J. Shea, “Neandertals, Competition, and the Origin of Modern Human 
Behavior in the Levant,” Evolutionary Anthropology 12 (2003): 173–187. A recent 
report on the draft sequence of the Neanderthal genome based on ancient 
DNA suggests that genic exchange between Neanderthals and modern humans 
may have occurred in the Near East before 100,000 years ago. See Richard E. 
Green et al., “A Draft Sequence of the Neandertal Genome,” Science 328 (2010): 
710–722. 
15. One aspect of modernity that may have evolved originally for a different func-
tion is that the neural structures underlying creative language use could have 
been derived from the evolution of throwing objects. See William H. Calvin, 
“The Unitary Hypothesis: A Common Neural Circuitry for Novel Manipula-
tions, Language, Plan-Ahead, and Throwing?” in Tools, Language, and Cognition 
in Human Evolution, ed. Kathleen R. Gibson and Tim Ingold (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1993), 230–250. See also, for example, Ian Tattersall, 
“Human Origins: Out of Africa,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
106 (2009): 16020.

196         3. modern humans and the super-brain
16. Tattersall, “Human Origins,” 16018.
17. G. Philip Rightmire, “Human Evolution in the Middle Pleistocene: The Role of 
Homo heidelbergensis,” Evolutionary Anthropology 6 (1998): 218–227.
18. On the energy and nutritional requirements of large brains, see T. Westermarck 
and E. Antila, “Diet in Relation to the Nervous System,” in Human Nutrition 
and Dietetics, 10th ed., ed. J. S. Garrow, W. P. T. James, and A. Ralph (New 
York: Churchill Livingstone, 2000), 715–730. On the choking risk created by the 
modern vocal tract, see Philip Lieberman, The Biology and Evolution of Language 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1984), 271–283.
19. Gerald M. Edelman and Giulio Tononi, A Universe of Consciousness: How Matter 
Becomes Imagination (New York: Basic Books, 2000), 37–50.
20. Gerhardt von Bonin, The Evolution of the Human Brain (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1963), 41–43; Philip V. Tobias, The Brain in Hominid Evolution 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1971), 101–103.
21. Klein suggests that a mutation related to speech occurred roughly 50,000 years 
ago among anatomically modern humans in Africa (“neural hypothesis”), in 
Human Career, 647–653.
22. See, for example, G. Philip Rightmire, “Homo in the Middle Pleistocene: Hypo-
digms, Variation, and Species Recognition,” Evolutionary Anthropology 17 (2008): 
8–21.
23. Pamela R. Willoughby, The Evolution of Modern Humans in Africa: A Comprehensive 
Guide (Lanham, Md.: AltaMira Press, 2007), 17–194; Ralph L. Holloway et al., 
“Evolution of the Brain in Humans—Paleoneurology,” in Encyclopedia of Neurosci-
ence, ed. Mark D. Binder, Nobutaka Hirokawa, and Uwe Windhorst (New York: 
Springer, 2009), 1326–1334.
24. Rightmire, “Homo in the Middle Pleistocene,” 12–13.
25. The pattern of cold-climate adaptation in Neanderthal anatomy was first noted 
in Carleton S. Coon, The Origin of Races (New York: Knopf, 1963), 542–548. 
More recent studies include Erik Trinkaus, “Neanderthal Limb Proportions and 
Cold Adaptation,” in Aspects of Human Evolution, ed. Chris Stringer (London: 
Taylor & Francis, 1981), 187–224. For a current view, see Timothy D. Weaver, 
“The Meaning of Neandertal Skeletal Morphology,” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 106 (2009): 16028–16033. Weaver argues that genetic drift 
was a significant factor in many characteristic Neanderthal features.
26. Ralph L. Holloway, “The Poor Brain of Homo sapiens neanderthalensis: See What 
You Please . . . ,” in Ancestors: The Hard Evidence, ed. Eric Delson (New York: Liss, 
1985), 319–324.
27. Trenton W. Holliday, “Postcranial Evidence of Cold Adaptation in European 
Neandertals,” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 104 (1997): 245–258. For 
a discussion of Neanderthal anatomy and technology, see John F. Hoffecker, A 
Prehistory of the North: Human Settlement of the Higher Latitudes (New Brunswick, 
N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 2005), 53–55.
28. Robin Dunbar, Grooming, Gossip, and the Evolution of Language (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1996), and “The Social Brain Hypothesis,” Evo-
lutionary Anthropology 6 (1998): 178–190. The evolutionary biology of eusociality 

3. modern humans and the super-brain        197
may offer some insight into the selection pressures that lay behind language 
and the super-brain, despite the difference between the super-brain and a super-
organism. True social behavior among the insects is thought to have evolved as 
a result of “progressive provisioning” of offspring by solitary females. In theory, 
selection would favor eusociality when the long-term reproductive fitness of 
offspring was enhanced by remaining at the nest site to help the parent provi-
sion larvae rather than by dispersing to reproduce as another solitary female. 
See Bert Hölldobler and E. O. Wilson, The Superorganism: The Beauty, Elegance, 
and Strangeness of Insect Societies (New York: Norton, 2009), 31–42. It has long 
been assumed that among early humans, provisioning of females and offspring 
became an increasingly important factor in long-term reproductive success as the 
demands of child care expanded.
29. Richard Byrne and Andrew Whiten, eds., Machiavellian Intelligence: Social Exper-
tise and the Evolution of Intellect in Monkeys, Apes, and Humans (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1988). See also Dunbar, Grooming, Gossip, and the Evolution of 
Language, 60–64.
30. Miriam Noël Haidle, “How to Think a Spear,” in Cognitive Archaeology and 
Human Evolution, ed. Sophie A. de Beaune, Frederick L. Coolidge, and Thomas 
Wynn (Cambridge: Cambridge university Press, 2009), 57–73.
31. See, for example, Claude Lévi-Strauss, The Savage Mind (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1966).
32. Joseph LeDoux, Synaptic Self: How Our Brains Become Who We Are (New York: 
Penguin, 2002).
33. Perhaps spoken language and symbolism—and the super-brain they enabled—
were at least in part a response to information overload in anatomically modern 
humans roughly 100,000 years ago. Language obviously provided a means of shar-
ing information among individual brains, but it also would have enhanced the 
organization and storage of information. In Africa, modern humans would have 
been exposed to greater potential for information overload than would Neander-
thals because the former occupied a more complex environmental setting than the 
latter. Brain size in modern humans subsequently declined, which would seem to 
reflect the decreased need for information storage in individual brains as greater 
quantities of information came to be stored outside the brain (and perhaps better 
organized). See, for example, Tobias, Brain in Hominid Evolution, 100–103.
34. Ralph L. Holloway, “Brief Communication: How Much Larger Is the Relative 
Volume of Area 10 of the Prefrontal Cortex in Humans?” American Journal of 
Physical Anthropology 118 (2002): 399–401; Daniel E. Lieberman, “Speculations 
About the Selective Basis for Modern Human Craniofacial Form,” Evolutionary 
Anthropology 17 (2008): 55–68.
35. Marcus E. Raichle et al., “Practice-related Changes in Human Brain Functional 
Anatomy During Nonmotor Learning,” Cerebral Cortex 4 (1994): 8–26; Peter 
Hagoort et al., “Integration of Word Meaning and World Knowledge in Lan-
guage Comprehension,” Science 304 (2004): 438–441; Elkhonon Goldberg, The 
New Executive Brain: Frontal Lobes in a Complex World (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2009), 22–24.

198         3. modern humans and the super-brain
36. Osbjorn M. Pearson, “Statistical and Biological Definitions of ‘Anatomically 
Modern’ Humans: Suggestions for a Unified Approach to Modern Morphol-
ogy,” Evolutionary Anthropology 17 (2008): 38–48. Chet S. Sherwood and col-
leagues also stress the likely importance of increases in the size of the cerebellum 
relative to body size in modern humans, as well as the connections between the 
cerebellum and the neocortex, observing that “these connections may be the 
anatomical substrate supporting the postulated cerebellar involvement in cogni-
tion, beyond its traditionally recognized role in motor coordination” (“Evolution 
of the Brain in Humans—Comparative Perspective,” in Encyclopedia of Neurosci-
ence, ed. Binder, Hirokawa, and Windhorst, 1336).
37. Jeffrey Laitman, “The Anatomy of Human Speech,” Natural History, August 
1984, 20–27; Lieberman, Biology and Evolution of Language, 271–283.
38. Leslie Aiello and Christopher Dean, An Introduction to Human Evolutionary Anat-
omy (London: Academic Press, 1990), 232–243.
39. Russell H. Tuttle, Apes of the World: Their Social Behavior, Communication, Mental-
ity and Ecology (Park Ridge, N.J.: Noyes, 1986), 36–39.
40. Aiello and Dean, Introduction to Human Evolutionary Anatomy, 232.
41. See, for example, Ian Tattersall, The Fossil Trail: How We Know What We Think 
We Know About Human Evolution (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995), 
211–212. Noam Chomsky has written about the difficulty of appreciating the 
strangeness of a phenomenon that is so familiar to all, in Language and Mind, 3rd 
ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 21–23.
42. Chomsky wrote, “The use of language for communication might turn out to be 
a kind of epiphenomenon” (On Nature and Language, 107). Terrence W. Deacon 
suggested that language was similar to a virus that had co-evolved symbiotically 
with humans, in his widely read book The Symbolic Species: The Co-Evolution of 
Language and the Brain (New York: Norton, 1997). A similar argument was made 
earlier in Lewis Thomas, The Lives of a Cell: Notes of a Biology Watcher (New York: 
Viking Press, 1974). The thesis has been criticized rather sharply by Chomsky, 
who complained that it “seem[s] only to reshape standard problems of science as 
utter mysteries” (On Nature and Language, 83). In a more recent paper, Morten 
H. Christiansen and Nick Chater again advanced the notion that language rep-
resents an “interdependent organism” (“Language as Shaped by the Brain,” Brain 
and Behavioral Sciences 32 [2008]: 489–558). Although I am skeptical of this idea 
(it seems to be a form of animism), the central theme of the paper makes sense 
to me; I also would guess that language has been “shaped by the brain” because it 
encodes internal mental representations for transmission in external form from 
one brain to another.
43. Marc D. Hauser, Noam Chomsky, and W. Tecumseh Fitch, “The Faculty of Lan-
guage: What Is It, Who Has It, and How Did It Evolve?” Science 298 (2002): 
1569–1579.
44. Lieberman, Biology and Evolution of Language, 287–313; Richard F. Kay, Matt Cart-
mill, and Michelle Balow, “The Hypoglossal Canal and the Origin of Human 
Vocal Behavior,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 95 (1988): 5417–
5419; Philip Lieberman, Eve Spoke: Human Language and Human Evolution (New 

3. modern humans and the super-brain        199
York: Norton, 1998); David De Gusta, W. Henry Gilbert, and Scott P. Turner, 
“Hypoglossal Canal Size and Hominid Speech,” Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences 96 (1999): 1800–1804; W. Tecumseh Fitch, “The Evolution of 
Speech: A Comparative Review,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4 (2000): 258–267.
45. d’Errico et al., “Archaeological Evidence for the Emergence of Language, Sym-
bolism, and Music,” 27–31.
46. Green et al., “Draft Sequence of the Neandertal Genome”; Wolfgang Enard et 
al., “Molecular Evolution of FOXP2, a Gene Involved in Speech and Language,” 
Nature 418 (2002): 869–872.
47. Stanley H. Ambrose, “Paleolithic Technology and Human Evolution,” Science 
291 (2001): 1748–1753.
48. James Deetz, Invitation to Archaeology (Garden City, N.Y.: Natural History Press, 
1967), 83–101. Deetz subsequently described spoken language as material cul-
ture “in its gaseous state” (In Small Things Forgotten: The Archaeology of American 
Life [Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Books, 1977], 24–25). The importance of multi-
ple hierarchical levels for infinite creative potential is addressed in W. Tecumseh 
Fitch and Marc D. Hauser, “Computational Constraints on Syntactic Processing 
in a Nonhuman Primate,” Science 303 (2004): 377–380.
49. For a discussion of the “generative interplay between the mental and material 
activities” of individuals and artifacts in the context of Europe 250,000 years 
ago, see Nathan Schlanger, “Understanding Levallois: Lithic Technology and 
Cognitive Archaeology,” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 6 (1996): 231–254. This 
recalls the observations on refitted cores from a 2.3-million-year-old Oldowan 
site in East Africa described in chapter 2 (H. Roche et al., “Early Hominid Stone 
Tool Production and Technical Skill 2.34 Myr Ago in West Turkana, Kenya,” 
Nature 399 [1999]: 57–60), although it is apparent that the number of hierarchi-
cally organized steps is significantly greater by 250,000 years ago.
50. Derek Bickerton argues that syntactic language was logically preceded by a non-
syntactic form of language comparable to that of very young children, in Lan-
guage and Species (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 130–163.
51. Eric Boëda, “Levallois: A Volumetric Construction, Methods, a Technique,” in The 
Definition and Interpretation of Levallois Technology, ed. Harold L. Dibble and Ofer 
Bar-Yosef (Madison, Wis.: Prehistory Press, 1995), 41–68. See also Philip Van Peer, 
The Levallois Reduction Strategy (Madison, Wis.: Prehistory Press, 1992); and Mellars, 
Neanderthal Legacy. In recent decades, the analysis of prepared cores has shifted 
from an emphasis on finished core types to study of manufacturing processes.
52. Boëda, “Levallois,” 46. See also Schlanger, “Understanding Levallois.”
53. Boëda, “Levallois,” 53.
54. Nicholas Rolland, “Levallois Technique Emergence: Single or Multiple? A 
Review of the Euro-African Record,” in Definition and Interpretation of Levallois 
Technology, ed. Dibble and Bar-Yosef, 333–359. The emergence of prepared-core 
techniques in Africa has been tied for many years to the earlier “Victoria West” 
cores, but a direct link recently has been challenged in Stephen J. Lycett, “Are 
Victoria West Cores ‘Proto-Levallois’? A Phylogenetic Assessment,” Journal of 
Human Evolution 56 (2009): 175–191.

200         3. modern humans and the super-brain
55. Sally McBrearty and Alison S. Brooks, “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New 
Interpretation of the Origin of Modern Human Behavior, ” Journal of Human 
Evolution 39 (2000): 487–490. Lower Paleolithic artifacts from Peninj (Tanzania) 
dating to 1.6 to 1.4 million years ago are thought to reflect early experimenta-
tion with controlling flake products from cores. See Ignacio del Torre et al., 
“The Oldowan Industry of Peninj and Its Bearing on the Reconstruction of the 
Technological Skills of Lower Pleistocene Hominids,” Journal of Human Evolution 
44 (2003): 203–224. 
56. See, for example, Robert Foley and Marta Mirazon Lahr, “On Stony Ground: 
Lithic Technology, Human Evolution, and the Emergence of Culture,” Evolution-
ary Anthropology 12 (2003): 109–122.
57. Rolland, “Levallois Technique Emergence,” 345–351; Mark White and Nick 
Ashton, “Lower Palaeolithic Core Technology and the Origins of the Levallois 
Method in North-Western Europe,” Current Anthropology 44 (2003): 598–609.
58. Mellars, Neanderthal Legacy, 61–84.
59. For an overview of technology, including composite implements, among forag-
ing peoples, see Wendell H. Oswalt, An Anthropological Analysis of Food-Getting 
Technology (New York: Wiley, 1976). Oswalt broke down individual implements 
into their component parts (“techno-units”) for a comparative analysis of techno-
logical complexity.
60. Composite weapons in the form of microblade-inset spear points are known from 
several late Upper Paleolithic sites in northeastern Asia. See Craig M. Lee, “Micro-
blade Technology in Beringia” [box], in John F. Hoffecker and Scott A. Elias, 
Human Ecology of Beringia (New York: Columbia University Press, 2007), 122–126.
61. Sylvia Beyries, “Functional Variability of Lithic Sets in the Middle Paleolithic,” 
in Upper Pleistocene Prehistory of Western Eurasia, ed. Harold L. Dibble and Anta 
Montet-White (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Museum, 1988), 213–
224; Patricia Anderson-Gerfaud, “Aspects of Behavior in the Middle Palaeolithic: 
Functional Analysis of Stone Tools from Southwest France,” in The Emergence of 
Modern Humans: An Archaeological Perspective, ed. Paul Mellars (Edinburgh: Edin-
burgh University Press, 1990), 389–418; Marlize Lombard, “Evidence of Hunt-
ing and Hafting During the Middle Stone Age at Sibudu Cave, KwaZulu-Natal: 
A Multianalytical Approach,” Journal of Human Evolution 48 (2005): 279–300.
62. Eric Boëda et al., “Bitumen as a Hafting Material on Middle Palaeolithic Arte-
facts,” Nature 380 (1996): 336–338; McBrearty and Brooks, “Revolution That 
Wasn’t,” 497; Bruce L. Hardy et al., “Stone Tool Function at the Paleolithic Sites 
of Starosele and Buran Kaya III, Crimea: Behavioral Implications,” Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 98 (2001): 10972–10977; Marlize Lombard, “The 
Gripping Nature of Ochre: The Association of Ochre with Howiesons Poort 
Adhesives and Later Stone Age Mastics from South Africa,” Journal of Human 
Evolution 53 (2007): 406–419.
63. Paola Villa et al., “The Howiesons Poort and MSA III at Klasies River Main Site, 
Cave 1A,” Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010): 630–655.
64. Archaeologists interested in the development of human cognitive faculties some-
times have been unimpressed with Levallois prepared-core technology. William 

3. modern humans and the super-brain        201
Noble and Iain Davidson were skeptical of the intentional control over blank 
size and shape and, more generally, found the technique “not important” 
(Human Evolution, Language and Mind: A Psychological and Archaeological Inquiry 
[Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996], 200–201). Thomas Wynn 
thought the required concepts of Levallois core technology “no more complex 
than those required for fine bifaces” (“The Evolution of Tools and Symbolic 
Behaviour,” in Handbook of Human Symbolic Evolution, ed. Andrew Lock and 
Charles R. Peters [Oxford: Blackwell, 1999], 273). These views do not seem to 
take into account the likely connection between Levallois cores and composite 
implements.
65. Ambrose, “Paleolithic Technology and Human Evolution,” 1751.
66. James B. Rowe et al., “The Prefrontal Cortex: Response Selection or Mainte-
nance Within Working Memory?” Science 288 (2000): 1656–1560; Coolidge and 
Wynn, “Working Memory.” See also Cordelia Fine, ed., The Britannica Guide to 
the Brain (London: Constable and Robinson, 2008), 112–118; and Goldberg, 
New Executive Brain, 92–98.
67. Hagoort et al., “Integration of Word Meaning and World Knowledge in Lan-
guage Comprehension”; Goldberg, New Executive Brain, 23–24.
68. John F Hoffecker, “Representation and Recursion in the Archaeological 
Record,” Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 14 (2007): 359–387.
69. Katherine Scott, “Two Hunting Episodes of Middle Palaeolithic Age at La Cotte 
de Saint-Brelade, Jersey (Channel Islands),” World Archaeology 12 (1980): 137–
152; Hervé Bocherens et al., “Isotopic Evidence for Diet and Subsistence Pattern 
of the Saint Cesaire I Neanderthal: Review and Use of a Multi-source Mixing 
Model,” Journal of Human Evolution 49 (2005): 71–87.
70. McBrearty and Brooks, “Revolution That Wasn’t,” 510–513; Klein, Human 
Career, 555–564.
71. Mellars, Neanderthal Legacy, 369–371; Ian Watts, “The Origin of Symbolic Cul-
ture,” in The Evolution of Culture: An Interdisciplinary View, ed. Robin Dunbar, 
Chris Knight, and Camilla Power (New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University 
Press, 1999), 113–146.
72. See, for example, John J. Shea, “Middle Paleolithic Spear Point Technology,” in 
Projectile Technology, ed. Heidi Knecht (New York: Plenum Press, 1997), 79–106.
73. Lombard, “Gripping Nature of Ochre,” 406–419.
74. Lyn Wadley, “Revisiting Cultural Modernity and the Role of Red Ochre in the 
Middle Stone Age,” in The Prehistory of Africa: Tracing the Lineage of Modern Man, 
ed. Himla Soodyall (Johannesburg: Jonathan Ball, 2006), 49–63.
75. J. Desmond Clark, “African and Asian Perspectives on the Origin of Modern 
Humans,” in The Origin of Modern Humans and the Impact of Chronometric Dating, 
ed. M. J. Aitken, C. B. Stringer, and P. A. Mellars (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press, 1993), 148–178.
76. François Bordes, “Mousterian Cultures in France,” Science 134 (1961): 803–810.
77. Lewis R. Binford and Sally R. Binford, “A Preliminary Analysis of Functional 
Variability in the Mousterian of Levallois Facies,” American Anthropologist 68 
(1966): 238–295.

202         3. modern humans and the super-brain
78. Ongoing research on composite implements may eventually reveal greater com-
plexity in the African technology, providing an additional contrast (other than 
the apparent lack of regional differentiation in artifact style) with that of the 
Neanderthals. For example, the alternative hafting locations (that is, end versus 
side) from southern Africa (recently reported in Villa et al., “Howiesons Poort 
and MSA III at Klasies River Main Site, Cave 1A”) may not be present in Eurasia.
79. See, for example, Francesco d’Errico, “The Invisible Frontier: A Multiple Spe-
cies Model for the Origin of Behavioral Modernity,” Evolutionary Anthropology 12 
(2003): 188–202.
80. A prominent critic of the perceived parallels between technology and language 
is Thomas Wynn, who observed that “the action sequences of tool-making and 
tool-use are organized and learned in a simple way. One action is tied to the 
preceding action, and long strings of such connections are learned by rote and 
repetition. This is very unlike the production of a sentence” (“Tools, Grammar 
and the Archaeology of Cognition,” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 1 [1991]: 
198). See also Thomas Wynn, “Handaxe Enigmas,” World Archaeology 27 (1995): 
10–24. Wynn’s view may reflect an emphasis on simple technologies; I find it dif-
ficult to avoid parallels between language structure and the complex hierarchical 
organization of more recent machines and devices.
81. Coolidge and Wynn, “Working Memory.”
82. Karen Emmorey, Sonya Mehta, and Thomas J. Grabowski, “The Neural Cor-
relates of Sign Versus Word Production,” NeuroImage 36 (2007): 202–208.
83. Humans who lived 300,000 to 250,000 years ago (and perhaps much earlier) 
probably communicated a substantial amount of information with a wide range 
of sounds. Vocal communication among vervet monkeys provides a possible 
model. In a classic study, How Monkeys See the World: Inside the Mind of Another 
Species (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), Dorothy L. Cheney and 
Robert S. Seyfarth reported that these highly social monkeys identify various 
predators with specific sounds (that is, vocal iconic symbols). Monkeys and apes 
also communicate with a variety of gestures, primarily using the hands and feet 
and sometimes employing objects. See Josep Call and Michael Tomasello, The 
Gestural Communication of Apes and Monkeys (Mahwah, N.J.: Erlbaum, 2007).
84. Lieberman, Biology and Evolution of Language.
85. See, for example, Noble and Davidson, “Evolutionary Emergence of Modern 
Human Behaviour.” In a provocative paper, “The Archaeology of Perception: 
Traces of Depiction and Language,” Current Anthropology 30 (1989): 125–155, Iain 
Davidson and William Noble suggested that visual art was an essential stepping 
stone to language—rather than merely a byproduct or consequence of it. This thesis 
received little support from other archaeologists—most of whom seem to believe 
that language either preceded or accompanied the appearance of visual art—but it 
offers a parallel to many of the arguments presented here (for example, that interac-
tion and feedback between brain and artifact—between internal and external men-
tal representation—was a catalyst for the development of human cognitive faculties).
86. Dietrich Mania and Ursula Mania, “Deliberate Engravings on Bone Artefacts of 
Homo erectus,” Rock Art Research 5 (1988): 91–107; Klein, Human Career, 407–410.

4. the upper paleolithic as history        203
87. Francesco d’Errico and April Nowell, “A New Look at the Berekhat Ram Figu-
rine: Implications for the Origins of Symbolism,” Cambridge Archaeological Jour-
nal 10 (2000): 123–167.
88. Marian Vanhaeren et al., “Middle Paleolithic Shell Beads in Algeria and Israel,” 
Science 312 (2006): 1785–1788. Indirect evidence for the use of plant and/or ani-
mal materials for line extends back to the indications of hafting discussed earlier 
(that is, around 250,000 years ago).
89. Wadley, “What Is Cultural Modernity,” 208; Marian Vanhaeren and Francesco 
d’Errico, “Aurignacian Ethno-linguistic Geography of Europe Revealed by Per-
sonal Ornaments,” Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006): 1105–1128.
90. Mellars, Neanderthal Legacy, 374–375; d’Errico, “Invisible Frontier,” 198–199. 
Personal ornaments are associated with Neanderthal skeletal remains in several 
occupation layers in southwestern Europe assigned to the “Chatelperronian” 
industry, but these may be cases where Middle Paleolithic artifacts and skeletal 
remains were mixed with overlying Upper Paleolithic artifacts by frost action. 
See, for example, Klein, Human Career, 748–750.
91. Christopher Henshilwood, “Fully Symbolic Sapiens Behaviour: Innovation in 
the Middle Stone Age at Blombos Cave, South Africa,” in Rethinking the Human 
Revolution: New Behavioural and Biological Perspectives on the Origin and Dispersal 
of Modern Humans, ed. Paul Mellars et al. (Cambridge: McDonald Institute for 
Archaeological Research, 2007), 123–132.
92. Clive Gamble, Timewalkers: The Prehistory of Global Colonization (Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1994), 181–202; Hoffecker, Prehistory of the 
North, 75–91.
93. Ofer Bar-Yosef, “The Middle and Early Upper Paleolithic in Southwest Asia 
and Neighboring Regions,” in The Geography of Neandertals and Modern Humans 
in Europe and the Greater Mediterranean, ed. Ofer Bar-Yosef and David Pilbeam 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography, 2000), 
107–156.
94. Hoffecker, “Innovation and Technological Knowledge in the Upper Paleolithic,” 
187–190.
95. Hoffecker, “Representation and Recursion in the Archaeological Record,” 
377–378.
96. d’Errico et al., “Archaeological Evidence for the Emergence of Language, Sym-
bolism, and Music,” 39–48.
97. Hoffecker, “Innovation and Technological Knowledge in the Upper Paleolithic,” 
190–196.
4. The Upper Paleolithic as History
1. 
V. Gordon Childe, “Retrospect,” Antiquity 32 (1958): 70. See also V. Gordon 
Childe, The Dawn of European Civilization (London: Kegan Paul, 1925). Bruce G. 
Trigger notes that this book had been preceded by several syntheses of European 
prehistory in Britain, but that it was the “original and convincing manner in 
which Childe analysed and presented his data” that accounted for its impact 
(Gordon Childe: Revolutions in Archaeology [New York: Columbia University Press, 

204         4. the upper paleolithic as history
1980], 37–40). See also Bruce G. Trigger, “Childe’s Relevance to the 1990s,” in 
The Archaeology of V. Gordon Childe, ed. David R. Harris (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1994), 9–34. The essay begins with the observation that Childe, 
“although dead since 1957, remains the most renowned and widely read archae-
ologist of the 20th century.”
2. 
Trigger, Gordon Childe, 91.
3. 
See, for example, V. Gordon Childe, “Races, Peoples, and Cultures in Prehis-
toric Europe,” History 18 (1933): 193–203.
4. 
V. Gordon Childe wrote that “food production . . . was an economic revolution. 
. . . It opened up a richer and more reliable supply of food. . . . Judging by the 
observed effects of the Industrial Revolution in England, a rapid increase of pop-
ulation would be the normal corollary of such a change” (New Light on the Most 
Ancient East: The Oriental Prelude to European Prehistory [London: Kegan Paul, 
1934], 42). And regarding the rise of urban centers, he wrote “in response to 
the opportunities of livelihood created by the new economy an industrial prole-
tariat multiplied as quickly as it did in England during the industrial revolution” 
(186). The concept of the “Industrial Revolution” was articulated in a series of 
lectures delivered at Oxford University in 1880 and 1881 by the elder Arnold 
Toynbee and later recalled and published by his students. See Arnold Toynbee, 
The Industrial Revolution (Boston: Beacon Press, 1956). See also Kevin Greene, 
“V. Gordon Childe and the Vocabulary of Revolutionary Change,” Antiquity 73 
(1999): 97–109.
5. 
Clive Gamble, Origins and Revolutions: Human Identity in Earliest Prehistory (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 10–16.
6. 
V. Gordon Childe, Man Makes Himself (London: Watts, 1936).
7. 
V. Gordon Childe, What Happened in History (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1942).
8. 
Trigger, Gordon Childe, 17–19; V. Gordon Childe, Scotland Before the Scots (Lon-
don: Methuen, 1946). In a personal recollection published in the early 1990s, 
Howard Kilbride-Jones wrote, “One must see everything in terms of Childe the 
exhibitionist. . . . I always had a feeling that Childe’s Marxism was an umbrella 
under which he sheltered in order to be different from the rest, meaning of 
course the Establishment” (“From Mr Howard Kilbride-Jones, 6 April 1992,” in 
Archaeology of V. Gordon Childe, ed. Harris, 135–139). Sally Green suggested the 
reverse—that Childe’s tongue-in-cheek comments were an umbrella under which 
he sheltered a sincere commitment to Marxism—in Prehistorian: A Biography of 
V. Gordon Childe (Bradford-on-Avon: Moonraker Press, 1981), 77. But his later 
writings make it clear that he saw little value in the way in which Marxist philoso-
phy had been applied to archaeology in the Soviet Union.
9. 
Trigger, Gordon Childe, 124.
10. Ibid., 131. See also Trigger, “Childe’s Relevance to the 1990s,” 23. It should be 
noted, however, that Childe made no reference to R. G. Collingwood in his 
article “Retrospect,” which was published posthumously.
11. R. G. Collingwood, The Idea of History (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1946). This 
book was edited and published several years after Collingwood’s death.
12. Ibid., 217.

4. the upper paleolithic as history        205
13. Trigger, Gordon Childe, 121.
14. V. Gordon Childe, History (London: Cobbett Press, 1947), 67–83. This book 
contains references to Marx, Engels, Lenin, and even Comrade Stalin.
15. V. Gordon Childe, Social Evolution (London: Watts, 1951), 1. In this book, Childe 
explicitly criticized the approach of Soviet archaeology—which had so impressed 
him in 1935—noting that it “assumes in advance precisely what archaeological 
facts have to prove.” (29). And he later wrote, “[A]t last I rid my mind of tran-
scendental laws determining history and mechanical causes, whether economic 
or environmental, automatically shaping its course” (“Retrospect,” 73).
16. V. Gordon Childe, Society and Knowledge: The Growth of Human Traditions (New 
York: Harper, 1956). Although this book contains only one—somewhat critical—
reference to the application of Marxist ideas to society and economics (102–103), 
Childe could not resist a comparison between “the Christian church under the 
Roman Empire [and] the Communist Party in the U.S.A.” in a discussion of 
groups within larger societies (101–102).
17. Ibid., 79.
18. Ibid., 124.
19. Collingwood, Idea of History, 215.
20. Ibid., 209.
21. Childe, Society and Knowledge, 1.
22. V. Gordon Childe, Piecing Together the Past: The Interpretation of Archaeologi-
cal Data (New York: Praeger, 1956), 1. Both Collingwood and Childe were 
swimming against the current. As Daniel Lord Smail observes, modern histo-
rians managed to sidestep Darwin and preserve the biblical time frame of the 
human past: “[T]he sacred was deftly translated into a secular key: the Garden 
of Eden became the irrigated fields of Mesopotamia, and the creation of man 
was reconfigured as the rise of civilization. Prehistory . . . was cantilevered 
outside the narrative buttresses that sustain the edifice of Western civiliza-
tion” (On Deep History and the Brain [Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2008], 4).
23. According to Childe, “[C]raft processes and products that archaeologists can 
observe can stand beside mathematical tablets and surgical papyri as genuine 
documents in the history of science” (“Retrospect,” 72).
24. Bruce G. Trigger, A History of Archaeological Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1989), 94–102.
25. See, for example, Henry Fairfield Osborn, Men of the Old Stone Age: Their Environ-
ment, Life, and Art (New York: Scribner, 1915); and Denis Peyrony, Élements de 
préhistoire (Ussel: Jacques Eyboulet, 1934).
26. The Upper Paleolithic was identified with the development of matrilineal clan 
society and the preceding Middle Paleolithic with the “promiscuous horde” of 
the Neanderthals. See, for example, P. P. Efimenko, Pervobytnoe obshchestvo, 2nd 
ed. (Leningrad: USSR Academy of Sciences, 1938).
27. John F. Hoffecker, “Innovation and Technological Knowledge in the Upper 
Paleolithic of Northern Eurasia,” Evolutionary Anthropology 14 (2005): 196.
28. Collingwood, Idea of History, 215.

206         4. the upper paleolithic as history
29. These dates reflect the application of a calibration curve to the radiocarbon chro-
nology of the Upper Paleolithic. Past fluctuations in atmospheric radiocarbon 
produce variable results in age estimates of carbon samples, and the cosmogenic 
radionuclide peak of 40,000 years ago corresponds to especially high concentra-
tions of 14C, which yields age estimates that are several thousand years younger 
than the calendrical scale.
30. Hoffecker, “Innovation and Technological Knowledge in the Upper Paleolithic,” 
195–196.
31. John F. Hoffecker, “Representation and Recursion in the Archaeological 
Record,” Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 14 (2007): 359–387.
32. Francesco d’Errico et al., “Archaeological Evidence for the Emergence of Lan-
guage, Symbolism, and Music—An Alternative Multidisciplinary Perspective,” 
Journal of World Prehistory 17 (2003): 1–70.
33. The comparison between EUP visual art and music (instruments) and EUP tech-
nology can be drawn only for the late EUP, because there is little evidence for any 
visual art or music making before 40,000 years ago, and this may be due entirely 
to sampling and preservation bias.
34. For a discussion of how visual art may be related to ideas about space, time, and 
light in the postmedieval world, see Leonard Shlain’s interesting book Art and 
Physics: Parallel Visions in Space, Time, and Light (New York: Morrow, 1991).
35. This is a complex issue long discussed by historians of technology as well as oth-
ers. See, for example, Thorstein Veblen, The Instinct of Workmanship and the State 
of the Industrial Arts (New York: Macmillan, 1914); and Lynn White, Medieval 
Religion and Technology: Collected Essays (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1978).
36. See, for example, Philip Allsworth-Jones, “The Szeletian and the Stratigraphic 
Succession in Central Europe and Adjacent Areas: Main Trends, Recent Results, 
and Problems for Resolution,” in The Emergence of Modern Humans: An Archaeo-
logical Perspective, ed. Paul Mellars (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 
1990), 160–242.
37. John F. Hoffecker, “The Spread of Modern Humans in Europe,” Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 106 (2009): 16040–16045.
38. Paul Mellars, “Going East: New Genetic and Archaeological Perspectives on 
the Modern Human Colonization of Eurasia,” Science 313 (2006): 796–800. 
Although slightly dated now, the best general account of the global dispersal of 
modern humans remains Brian Fagan, The Journey from Eden: The Peopling of Our 
World (London: Thames and Hudson, 1990). For a more current overview, see 
Alice Roberts, The Incredible Human Journey: The Story of How We Colonised the 
Planet (London: Bloomsbury, 2009).
39. Rhys Jones, “East of Wallace’s Line: Issues and Problems in the Colonisation of 
the Australian Continent,” in The Human Revolution: Behavioural and Biological 
Perspectives on the Origins of Modern Humans, ed. Paul Mellars and Chris Stringer 
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1989), 743–782; Philip J. Hapgood 
and Natalie R. Franklin, “The Revolution That Didn’t Arrive: A Review of Pleis-
tocene Sahul,” Journal of Human Evolution 55 (2008): 187–222. Given the origins 

4. the upper paleolithic as history        207
of the Australian EUP (that is, watercraft), according to Hapgood and Franklin, 
the absence of earlier evidence for coastal marine resource use is likely due to 
rising sea levels, which probably inundated the earlier sites (203).
40. Hapgood and Franklin, “Revolution That Didn’t Arrive,” 192–201.
41. Ibid., 207–211. Bone implements at Bone Cave (Tasmania) were recovered in 
deposits that yielded dates as early 33,385 ± 554 calibrated radiocarbon years 
ago, but otherwise are unknown in the Australian EUP. It should be noted 
that bone implements are scarce in the oldest Upper Paleolithic assemblages of 
the Near East and Europe, despite their earlier presence in the African Middle  
Stone Age.
42. Anthony E. Marks and C. Reid Ferring, “The Early Upper Paleolithic of the 
Levant,” in The Early Upper Paleolithic: Evidence from Europe and the Near East, 
ed. John F. Hoffecker and Cornelia A. Wolf (Oxford: British Archaeological 
Reports, 1988), 43–72; Ofer Bar-Yosef, “The Middle and Early Upper Paleolithic 
in Southwest Asia and Neighboring Regions,” in The Geography of Neandertals and 
Modern Humans in Europe and the Greater Mediterranean, ed. Ofer Bar-Yosef and 
David Pilbeam (Cambridge, Mass.: Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Eth-
nology, 2000), 107–156. Bar-Yosef describes the transformation of stone industry 
in the Levant as a “technological revolution” (142–143).
43. Steven L. Kuhn et al., “The Early Upper Paleolithic Occupations at Üçağizli Cave 
(Hatay, Turkey),” Journal of Human Evolution 56 (2009): 87–113.
44. Miryam Bar-Mathews and Avner Ayalon, “Climatic Conditions in the Eastern 
Mediterranean During the Last Glacial (60–10 ky) and Their Relations to the 
Upper Palaeolithic in the Levant as Inferred from Oxygen and Carbon Isotope 
Systematics of Cave Deposits,” in More Than Meets the Eye: Studies on Upper Pal-
aeolithic Diversity in the Near East, ed. A. Nigel Goring-Morris and Anna Belfer-
Cohen (Oxford: Oxbow Books, 2003), 13–18.
45. See, for example, William H. McNeill, Plagues and Peoples (Garden City, N.Y.: 
Anchor Books, 1976); and Brian Fagan, Floods, Famines, and Emperors: El Niño and 
the Fate of Civilizations (New York: Basic Books, 1999).
46. Ted Goebel, “The Pleistocene Colonization of Siberia and Peopling of the Amer-
icas: An Ecological Approach,” Evolutionary Anthropology 8 (1999): 208–227.
47. Erik Trinkaus, “Neanderthal Limb Proportions and Cold Adaptation,” in 
Aspects of Human Evolution, ed. Chris Stringer (London: Taylor & Francis, 1981), 
187–224; Trenton W. Holliday, “Brachial and Crural Indices of European Late 
Upper Paleolithic and Mesolithic Humans,” Journal of Human Evolution 36 
(1999): 549–566.
48. John F. Hoffecker, A Prehistory of the North (New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers Univer-
sity Press, 2005), 75–82.
49. Hoffecker, “Spread of Modern Humans in Europe,” 16044.
50. A new statistical approach has been applied to the classification of isolated dental 
remains from these sites, concluding that most of them can probably be assigned 
to modern humans. See Shara E. Bailey, Timothy D. Weaver, and Jean-Jacques 
Hublin, “Who Made the Aurignacian and Other Early Upper Paleolithic Indus-
tries?” Journal of Human Evolution 57 (2009): 11–26.

208         4. the upper paleolithic as history
51. Steven L. Kuhn and Amilcare Bietti, “The Late Middle and Early Upper Paleo-
lithic in Italy,” in Geography of Neandertals and Modern Humans in Europe and the 
Greater Mediterranean, ed. Bar-Yosef and Pilbeam, 49–76.
52. Vance T. Holliday et al., “Geoarchaeology of the Kostenki–Borshchevo Sites, 
Don River Valley, Russia,” Geoarchaeology: An International Journal 22 (2007): 
181–228; John F. Hoffecker et al., “From the Bay of Naples to the River Don: 
The Campanian Ignimbrite Eruption and the Middle to Upper Paleolithic Tran-
sition in Eastern Europe,” Journal of Human Evolution 55 (2008): 858–870.
53. Richard G. Klein, Man and Culture in the Late Pleistocene: A Case Study (San Fran-
cisco: Chandler, 1969), 29–31.
54. John F. Hoffecker et al., “Evidence for Kill-Butchery Events of Early Upper Paleo-
lithic Age at Kostenki, Russia,” Journal of Archaeological Science 37 (2010): 1073–1089.
55. Francesco G. Fedele, Biagio Giaccio, and Irka Hajdas, “Timescales and Cultural 
Processes at 40,000 bp in the Light of the Campanian Ignimbrite Eruption, West-
ern Eurasia,” Journal of Human Evolution 55 (2008): 834–857.
56. Paola Villa, François Bon, and Jean-Christophe Castel, “Fuel, Fire and Fireplaces 
in the Palaeolithic of Western Europe,” Review of Archaeology 23 (2002): 33–42.
57. The earliest known eyed needle in eastern Europe dates to about 40,000 years 
ago and was recovered from Mezmaiskaya Cave (Russia) in the northwestern 
Caucasus. See Liubov V. Golovanova et al., “Significance of Ecological Factors 
in the Middle to Upper Paleolithic Transition,” Current Anthropology 51 (2010): 
655–691.
58. Heidi Knecht, “Splits and Wedges: The Techniques and Technology of Early 
Aurignacian Antler Working,” in Before Lascaux: The Complex Record of the Early 
Upper Paleolithic, ed. Heidi Knecht, Ann Pike-Tay, and Randall White (Boca 
Raton, Fla.: CRC Press, 1993), 137–162.
59. Nicholas J. Conard, “Palaeolithic Ivory Sculptures from Southwestern Germany 
and the Origins of Figurative Art,” Nature 426 (2003): 830–832, and “A Female 
Figurine from the Basal Aurignacian of Hohle Fels Cave in Southwestern Ger-
many,” Nature 459 (2009): 248–252.
60. d’Errico et al., “Archaeological Evidence for the Emergence of Language, Sym-
bolism, and Music,” 39–48.
61. This burial, which contained the poorly preserved remains of a child, was dis-
covered by A. N. Rogachev at Kostenki 15 in 1952 and has since been dated by 
radiocarbon to about 30,000 calibrated years ago. Several years later, Rogachev 
excavated another burial in a later EUP level at Kostenki 14, but the dating of 
this skeleton has been problematic—it yielded several younger radiocarbon dates 
in recent years. See A.  N. Rogachev, “Mnogosloinye Stoyanki Kostenkovsko- 
Borshevskogo raiona na Donu i Problema Razvitiya Kul’tury v Epokhy Verkh-
nego Paleolita na Russkoi Ravnine,” Materialy i Issledovaniya po Arkheologii SSSR 
59 (1957): 9–134; and Klein, Man and Culture in the Late Pleistocene, 94–96.
62. Ernest Becker, The Denial of Death (New York: Free Press, 1973).
63. The most famous example of grave offerings from a Neanderthal burial is the 
evidence of flowers, based on concentrations of preserved pollen, reported 
from Shanidar Cave (Iraq) by Ralph S. Solecki, Shanidar, the First Flower People 

4. the upper paleolithic as history        209
(New York: Knopf, 1971). It now appears likely, however, that the pollen con-
centrations are derived from flower heads brought into the cave by burrowing 
rodents. See Jeffrey D. Sommer, “The Shanidar IV ‘Flower Burial’: A Re-evalu-
ation of Neanderthal Burial Ritual,” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 9 (1999): 
127–129.
64. Childe was not a Paleolithic specialist, but he did discuss early prehistory briefly 
in several books. His final comments on the Gravettian would seem to be in the 
posthumously published V. Gordon Childe, The Prehistory of European Society 
(Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1958).
65. Clive Gamble, The Palaeolithic Settlement of Europe (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1986); Jir ˇí Svoboda, Vojen Lozˇek, and Emanuel V lc ˇek, Hunters 
Between East and West: The Paleolithic of Moravia (New York: Plenum Press, 1996), 
131–170.
66. Goebel, “Pleistocene Colonization of Siberia and Peopling of the Americas,” 
216–218.
67. See, for example, Lawrence G. Straus, “The Upper Paleolithic of Europe: An 
Overview,” Evolutionary Anthropology 4 (1995): 4–16.
68. Wendell H. Oswalt, The Anthropological Analysis of Food-Getting Technology (New 
York: Wiley, 1976).
69. Hoffecker, Prehistory of the North, 91–94.
70. See, for example, Childe, Man Makes Himself, 257–270. This is the final chapter 
of the book: “The Acceleration and Retardation of Progress.”
71. See, for example, David S. Landes, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some 
Are So Rich and Some So Poor (New York: Norton, 1999).
72. John F. Hoffecker, “The Eastern Gravettian ‘Kostenki Culture’ as an Arctic 
Adaptation,” Anthropological Papers of the University of Alaska, n.s., 2 (2002): 
115–136. 
73. Michael P. Richards et al., “Stable Isotope Evidence for Increasing Dietary 
Breadth in the European Mid-Upper Paleolithic,” Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences 98 (2001): 6528–6532.
74. Olga Soffer et al., “Palaeolithic Perishables Made Permanent,” Antiquity 74 
(2000): 812–821; Zbigniew M. Bochenski et al., “Fowling During the Gravettian: 
The Avifauna of Pavlov I, Czech Republic,” Journal of Archaeological Science 36 
(2009): 2655–2665.
75. Pawel Valde-Nowak, Adam Nadachowski, and Mieczyslaw Wolsan, “Upper Pal-
aeolithic Boomerang Made of a Mammoth Tusk in South Poland,” Nature 329 
(1987): 436–438.
76. Hoffecker, “Eastern Gravettian ‘Kostenki Culture’ as an Arctic Adaptation,” 
122–123.
77. Pamela P. Vandiver et al., “The Origins of Ceramic Technology at Dolni 
Veˇstonice, Czechoslovakia,” Science 246 (1989): 1002–1008.
78. Hoffecker, “Eastern Gravettian ‘Kostenki Culture’ as an Arctic Adaptation,” 
120–123.
79. Roy A. Rappaport, Ritual and Religion in the Making of Humanity (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1999).

210         4. the upper paleolithic as history
80. Childe, Man Makes Himself, 261–270.
81. Clive Gamble, The Palaeolithic Societies of Europe (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1999), 404–414.
82. Gamble, Palaeolithic Settlement of Europe, 324–331.
83. Pavel Dolukhanov, Dmitry Sokoloff, and Anvar Shukurov, “Radiocarbon Chro-
nology of Upper Palaeolithic Sites in Eastern Europe at Improved Resolution,” 
Journal of Archaeological Science 28 (2001): 699–712; Kelly E. Graf, “The Good, 
the Bad, and the Ugly: Evaluating the Radiocarbon Chronology of the Middle 
and Late Upper Paleolithic in the Enisei River Valley, South-Central Siberia,” 
Journal of Archaeological Science 36 (2009): 694–707.
84. Hoffecker, Prehistory of the North, 94–95.
85. Hoffecker, “Innovation and Technological Knowledge in the Upper Paleolithic,” 
193–195.
86. Aaron Jonas Stutz, Natalie D. Munro, and Guy Bar-Oz, “Increasing the Resolu-
tion of the Broad Spectrum Revolution in the Southern Levantine Epipaleo-
lithic (19–12 ka),” Journal of Human Evolution 56 (2009): 294–306.
87. According to Childe, “The bow . . . is perhaps the first engine man devised. The 
motive power is, indeed, just human muscular energy, but in the tension of the 
bow energy gradually expended in bending it is accumulated so as to be released 
all at once and concentrated in dispatching the arrow. The spear-thrower inge-
niously augments the energy a man’s arm can impart to a missile on the principle 
of the lever” (Man Makes Himself, 67).
88. Pierre Cattelain, “Un crochet de propulseur solutréen de la grotte de Combe-
Saunière 1 (Dordogne),” Bulletin de la Société préhistorique française 86 (1989): 
213–216.
89. Carl Mitcham, Thinking Through Technology: The Path Between Engineering and Phi-
losophy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994), 20–24.
90. Grahame Clark, Prehistoric Europe: The Economic Basis (London: Methuen, 1952), 
30–31.
91. I.  G. Pidoplichko, Mezhirichskie zhilishcha iz Kostei Mamonta (Kiev: Naukova 
dumka, 1976), 164–167; Hoffecker, “Innovation and Technological Knowledge 
in the Upper Paleolithic,” 194–195.
92. Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, or the Matter, Forme and Power of a Common-wealth 
Ecclesiasticall and Civill (London: Penguin, 1968), 81.
93. Elisabetta Boaretto et al., “Radiocarbon Dating of Charcoal and Bone Collagen 
Associated with Early Pottery at Yuchanyan Cave, Hunan Province, China,” Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (2009): 9595–9600.
94. Charles T. Keally, Yasuhiro Taniguchi, and Yaroslav V. Kuzmin, “Understand-
ing the Beginnings of Pottery Technology in Japan and Neighboring East Asia,” 
Review of Archaeology 24 (2003): 3–14.
95. Ibid., 5.
96. New evidence for EUP dog domestication has been reported in Mietje Ger-
monpré et al., “Fossil Dogs and Wolves from Palaeolithic Sites in Belgium, the 
Ukraine, and Russia: Osteometry, Ancient DNA, and Stable Isotopes,” Journal 
of Archaeological Science 36 (2009): 473–490.

5. mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        211
97. Norbert Benecke, “Studies on Early Dog Remains from Northern Europe,” Jour-
nal of Archaeological Science 14 (1987): 31–49; Mikhail V. Sablin and Gennady A. 
Khlopachev, “The Earliest Ice Age Dogs: Evidence from Eliseevichi I,” Current 
Anthropology 43 (2002): 795–799.
98. Peter Savolainen et al., “Genetic Evidence for an East Asian Origin for Domesti-
cated Dogs,” Science 298 (2002): 1610–1613.
99. Francesco d’Errico, “Palaeolithic Origins of Artificial Memory Systems: An 
Evolutionary Perspective,” in Cognition and Material Culture: The Archaeology of 
Symbolic Storage, ed. Colin Renfrew and Chris Scarre (Cambridge: McDonald 
Institute for Archaeological Research, 1998), 19–50.
100. Alexander Marshack, The Roots of Civilization: The Cognitive Beginnings of Man’s 
First Art, Symbol and Notation (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1972).
101. d’Errico, “Palaeolithic Origins of Artificial Memory Systems,” 43.
102. I.  G. Pidoplichko, Pozdnepaleoliticheskie zhilishcha iz kostei mamonta na Ukraine 
(Kiev: Naukova dumka, 1969), and Mezhirichskie zhilishcha; Zoya A. Abramova, 
“Two Examples of Terminal Paleolithic Adaptations,” in From Kostenki to Clovis: 
Upper Paleolithic–Paleo-Indian Adaptations, ed. Olga Soffer and N. D. Praslov (New 
York: Plenum Press, 1993), 85–100; John F. Hoffecker, Desolate Landscapes: Ice-
Age Settlement in Eastern Europe (New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 
2002), 206–232.
103. James R. Sackett, “The Neuvic Group: Upper Paleolithic Open-Air Sites in the 
Perigord,” in Upper Pleistocene Prehistory of Western Eurasia, ed. Harold L. Dibble 
and Anna Montet-White (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Museum, 
1988), 61–84.
104. Hoffecker, “Representation and Recursion in the Archaeological Record,” 380– 
381.
105. An exception is the hexagonal cell design of a honeybee comb. See, for example, 
Edward O. Wilson, The Insect Societies (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Har-
vard University Press, 1971), 97, fig. 5–16.
106. Janusz  K. Kozlowski, “The Gravettian in Central and Eastern Europe,” in 
Advances in World Archaeology, ed. Fred Wendorf and Angela E. Close (Orlando, 
Fla.: Academic Press, 1986), 5:131–200; Svoboda, Lozˇek, and V lc ˇek, Hunters 
Between East and West, 188–194.
5. Mindscapes of the Postglacial Epoch
1. 
The most impressive example of landscape modification in the Upper Paleolithic 
may be the introduction of one or more small mammals into New Ireland in the 
southwestern Pacific about 20,000 years ago. See Christopher Gosden, Social 
Being and Time (Oxford: Blackwell, 1994), 25.
2. 
André Leroi-Gourhan, Gesture and Speech, trans. Anna Bostock Berger (Cam-
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1993), 328–346.
3. 
Peter Gathercole, “Childe’s Revolutions,” in Archaeology: The Key Concepts, ed. 
Colin Renfrew and Paul Bahn (Abingdon: Routledge, 2005), 35–41.
4. 
Lewis Mumford, The Myth of the Machine: Technics and Human Development (New 
York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1967), 190.

212         5. mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
5. 
See, especially, Jan Assmann, The Mind of Ancient Egypt: History and Meaning in the 
Time of the Pharaohs (New York: Metropolitan Books, 2002), 46–49.
6. 
John D. Kasarda, “The Structural Implications of Social System Size: A Three-
Level Analysis,” American Sociological Review 39 (1974): 19–28, cited in the con-
text of the rise of Sumerian civilization in Guillermo Algaze, Ancient Mesopotamia 
at the Dawn of Civilization: The Evolution of an Urban Landscape (Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 2008), 139.
7. 
Kwang-Chih Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, 4th ed. (New Haven, 
Conn.: Yale University Press, 1986); Michael D. Coe, The Maya, 6th ed. (New 
York: Thames and Hudson, 1999), 103–104; Charles Keith Maisels, Early Civili-
zations of the Old World: The Formative Histories of Egypt, the Levant, Mesopotamia, 
India, and China (London: Routledge, 1999).
8. 
The larger chiefdoms of Oceania are examples of large societies—perhaps tens 
of thousands of people—that did not become nation-states. See Patrick Vinton 
Kirch, On the Road of the Winds: An Archaeological History of the Pacific Islands 
Before European Contact (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000), 311–
313.
9. 
Barry J. Kemp, Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilization (London: Routledge, 
1989), 19.
10. See, for example, Robert McC. Adams, The Evolution of Urban Society: Early 
Mesopotamia and Prehispanic Mexico (Chicago: Aldine, 1966). V. Gordon Childe 
enumerated ten criteria of civilizations (for example, monumental public build-
ings, writing) in “The Urban Revolution,” Town Planning Review 21 (1950): 3–17. 
Childe also observed that “all measurement involves abstract thinking. In mea-
suring lengths of stuffs you ignore their materials, colours, patterns, textures, 
and so on, to concentrate on length” (Man Makes Himself [London: Watts, 1936], 
219). 
11. According to Assmann, “The monumental tombs of Egypt are not graves in any 
contemporary sense. Their significance in Egyptian civilization is comparable to 
that which we attach to art and literature” (Mind of Ancient Egypt, 67).
12. Bert Hölldobler and E. O. Wilson, The Super-Organism: The Beauty, Elegance, and 
Strangeness of Insect Societies (New York: Norton, 2009).
13. The limited pace of invention during ancient times—compared with both the 
preceding and later epochs—has been discussed by many, including Childe, Man 
Makes Himself, 257–270; and Mumford, Myth of the Machine, 234–262. See also 
M. I. Finley, The Ancient Economy, 2nd ed., updated (Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1999); Robert McC. Adams, Paths of Fire: An Anthropologist’s Inquiry 
into Western Technology (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1996), 37–46; 
and Joel Mokyr, The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1990), 19–30.
14. Adams, Paths of Fire, 41.
15. In recent decades, historians of technology have modified the picture of stag-
nation in late antiquity—especially for the late Roman period—noting that 
innovations and applications of novel technologies (particularly water wheels) 
were more common than previously supposed. See, for example, Kevin Greene, 

5. mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        213
“Technological Innovation and Economic Progress in the Ancient World: M. I. 
Finley Reconsidered,” Economic History Review, n.s., 53 (2000): 29–59; and Luke 
Lavan, “Explaining Technological Change: Innovation, Stagnation, Recession 
and Replacement,” in Technology in Transition, a.d. 300–650, ed. Luke Lavan, 
Enrico Zanini, and Alexander Sarantis (Leiden: Brill, 2007), xv–xl.
16. Claude Lévi-Strauss, The Savage Mind (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1966), 234. See also Roy A. Rappaport, Ritual and Religion in the Making of 
Humanity (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 17–22. Rappaport 
observed that “problems set by Alternatives arise, as much or more from the 
ordering of symbols through grammar . . . [which] makes the conception of alter-
natives virtually ineluctable” (17).
17. Peter Bellwood, First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies (Malden, Mass.: 
Blackwell, 2005), 44–49.
18. Dolores R. Piperno et al., “Processing of Wild Cereal Grains in the Upper Pal-
aeolithic Revealed by Starch Grain Analysis,” Nature 430 (2005): 670–673. The 
authors note ethnographic examples of baking ovens similar to the feature dis-
covered at Ohalo II. Devices and procedures for the preparation of food have 
been termed “external digestion” and are another example of humans redesign-
ing themselves as organisms with technology. See Martin Jones, “Moving North: 
Archaeobotanical Evidence for Plant Diet in Middle and Upper Paleolithic 
Europe,” in The Evolution of Hominin Diets: Integrating Approaches to the Study of 
Palaeolithic Subsistence, ed. Jean-Jacques Hublin and Michael P. Richards (Dor-
drecht: Springer, 2009), 171–180.
19. Ofer Bar-Yosef, “The Natufian Culture in the Levant, Threshold to the Origins 
of Agriculture,” Evolutionary Anthropology 6 (1998): 173.
20. Jean Perrot, “Le gisement natoufien de Mallaha (Eynan), Israel,” L’Anthropologie 
70 (1966): 437–484; Gordon C. Hillman, “Late Pleistocene Changes in Wild 
Plant Foods Available to Hunter-Gatherers of the Northern Fertile Crescent: 
Possible Preludes to Cereal Cultivation,” in The Origins and Spread of Agriculture 
and Pastoralism in Eurasia, ed. David R. Harris (Washington, D.C.: Smithson-
ian Institution Press, 1996), 159–203. For a widely accessible account of the 
Natufian and the transition to sedentary life with an emphasis on the role of 
climate change, see Brian Fagan, The Long Summer: How Climate Changed Civiliza-
tion (New York: Basic Books, 2004), 79–125.
21. A. M. T. Moore, G. C. Hillman, and A. J. Legge, Village on the Euphrates: From 
Foraging to Farming at Abu Hureyra (London: Oxford University Press, 2000); Bar-
Yosef, “Natufian Culture in the Levant,” 172–174; Bellwood, First Farmers, 49–54.
22. Gordon C. Hillman and M. Stuart Davies, “Measured Domestication Rates in 
Wild Wheat and Barley Under Primitive Cultivation and Their Archaeological 
Implications,” Journal of World Prehistory 4 (1990): 157–222.
23. Bellwood, First Farmers, 59–66.
24. Robert McC. Adams and Hans J. Nissen, The Uruk Countryside: The Natural Set-
ting of Urban Societies (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972); Guillermo 
Algaze, The Uruk World System: The Dynamics of Expansion of Early Mesopotamian 
Civilization, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005).

214         5. mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
25. Robert McC. Adams, Heartland of Cities: Surveys of Ancient Settlement and Land 
Use on the Central Floodplain of the Euphrates (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1981); Maisels, Early Civilizations of the Old World, 175.
26. See the classic Samuel Noah Kramer, The Sumerians: Their History, Culture, and 
Character (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963). Sumer did not become 
a unified nation-state for another 700 years, when the southern cities were uni-
fied under Lugal-zagesi in 2340 b.c.e. See Georges Roux, Ancient Iraq, 3rd ed. 
(London: Penguin, 1992).
27. Frank Hole, “Environmental Instabilities and Urban Origins,” in Chiefdoms and 
Early States in the Near East: The Organizational Dynamics of Complexity, ed. Gil 
Stein and Mitchell S. Rothman (Madison, Wis.: Prehistory Press, 1994), 121–
143. See also Fagan, Long Summer, 134–139. Algaze wrote, “Early Near Eastern 
villagers domesticated plants and animals. Uruk urban institutions, in turn, 
domesticated humans” (Ancient Mesopotamia at the Dawn of Civilization, 129).
28. Kramer, Sumerians, 77–88; Maisels, Early Civilizations of the Old World, 166–169.
29. Algaze, Ancient Mesopotamia at the Dawn of Civilization, 135–137.
30. Ibid., 66–68; Kramer, Sumerians, 104. A model sailboat was recovered from 
Eridu.
31. V. Gordon Childe, “Wheeled Vehicles,” in A History of Technology, vol. 1, From 
Early Times to the Fall of Ancient Empires, ed. Charles Singer, Eric J. Holmyard, and 
A. R. Hall (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1954), 716–729; Kramer, Sumerians, 104–
105; L. Sprague de Camp, The Ancient Engineers (New York: Ballantine Books, 
1963), 57–58; Glyn Daniel, The First Civilizations: The Archaeology of Their Origins 
(New York: Crowell, 1968), 72–73; Stuart Piggott, The Earliest Wheeled Transport: 
From the Atlantic Coast to the Caspian Sea (London: Thames and Hudson, 1983).
32. The true circle itself is not found in the natural world, and is a concept gener-
ated by the modern human mind, according to Ernest Zebrowski, A History of 
the Circle: Mathematical Reasoning and the Physical Universe (New Brunswick, N.J.: 
Rutgers University Press, 1999).
33. Algaze, Ancient Mesopotamia at the Dawn of Civilization, 131.
34. Kramer, Sumerians, 104; Algaze, Ancient Mesopotamia at the Dawn of Civilization, 
82–83.
35. My own view is that the engineering of the public buildings is far outweighed in 
originality and significance by the innovations in information technology and 
applications of animal and wind power in agriculture and transportation.
36. Kramer, Sumerians, 135–144.
37. I. E. S. Edwards, The Pyramids of Egypt (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1961), 116–
138. See also Mumford, Myth of the Machine, 194–198.
38. Kramer, Sumerians, 91; Maisels, Early Civilizations of the Old World, 74–75.
39. Kemp, Ancient Egypt, 31–35. For a comparison of Sumer and Egypt, see Maisels, 
Early Civilizations of the Old World.
40. Chang, Archaeology of Ancient China, 309–331. Large structures were constructed 
during the Shang dynasty, however, including the palace at Erh-li-t’ou and the 
subterranean royal tombs at An-yang. Regarding the foundation of the state in 
China, Maisels wrote: “The original pre-state solidarity was the highly potent 

5. mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        215
solidarity of the clan. . . . Social divisions were enhanced with the state, but as its 
advent was an incremental process and not a revolutionary one” (Early Civiliza-
tions of the Old World, 339–340).
41. Coe, Maya, 41–55.
42. Ibid., 103–104.
43. Marcia Ascher and Robert Ascher, Code of the Quipu: A Study in Media, Mathemat-
ics, and Culture (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1980).
44. R. G. Collingwood, The Idea of History (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1946), 232.
45. Herbert Butterfield, The Origins of History (New York: Basic Books, 1981). See 
also Assmann, Mind of Ancient Egypt, 13–17.
46. Claude Lévi-Strauss, Structural Anthropology, trans. Claire Jacobson and Brooke 
Grundfest Schoepf (New York: Basic Books, 1963), 209.
47. Claude Lévi-Strauss, The Raw and the Cooked: Introduction to a Science of Mythology, 
trans. John Weightman and Doreen Weightman (New York: Harper & Row, 
1969), 1:16. Edmund Leach translated the original French text as “machines for 
the suppression of time” (Claude Lévi-Strauss [New York: Viking Press, 1970], 125).
48. Collingwood, Idea of History, 14–17; Butterfield, Origins of History, 22–79.
49. Assmann, Mind of Ancient Egypt, 20–21. Many aspects of Egyptian technology are 
described in A. Lucas and J. R. Harris, Ancient Egyptian Materials and Industries, 
4th ed. (London: Arnold, 1962).
50. The sed festival was performed when the pharaoh reached the thirtieth year of his 
reign. According to Assmann, “Djoser’s casting of the ritual structures in stone 
rather than the transient materials previously employed served the purpose of 
enabling the king to continue the sed festival into all eternity” (Mind of Ancient 
Egypt, 56).
51. Assmann wrote, “Where ritual was concerned . . . [e]verything hinged on precise 
reiteration. Maximum care was taken to prevent deviation and improvisation” 
(ibid., 71). The irony of these observations is that historians traditionally have 
viewed the invention of writing as the beginning of history (describing preliter-
ate societies as “people without history”), while it would seem that the Egyptians 
used writing to help suppress history.
52. Assmann noted that “the division into nomes represented a thoroughgoing reor-
ganization of the territory, undertaken probably as late as the reign of Djoser 
(2687–2667 b.c.). There is thus no continuity between the rival chiefdoms of the 
Naqada Period and the nomes of the Old Kingdom. Indeed, the structures that 
had evolved before the advent of the state were ruthlessly suppressed” (ibid., 47).
53. According to Assmann, “The police state character of the Middle Kingdom is 
the inevitable institutional expression of a state that styles itself primarily as a 
bulwark against chaos, as a bastion of a civilization built upon law, order, and 
justice. Such a state will inevitably develop organs of control, surveillance, and 
punishment that curtail individual freedom of movement” (ibid., 139). 
54. Maisels, Early Civilizations of the Old World, 185; Algaze, Ancient Mesopotamia at 
the Dawn of Civilization, 128.
55. de Camp, Ancient Engineers, 57–82; John McLeish, The Story of Numbers: How Math-
ematics Shaped Civilization (New York: Fawcett Columbine, 1991), 32–37; David C. 

216         5. mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
Lindberg, The Beginnings of Western Science: The European Scientific Tradition in Philo-
sophical, Religious, and Institutional Context, 600 b.c. to a.d. 1450 (Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1992), 13–20. See also Roux, Ancient Iraq, 357–366.
56.  J. R. McNeill and William H. McNeill, The Human Web: A Bird’s-Eye View of 
World History (New York: Norton, 2003), 55–82; Daniel R. Headrick, Technol-
ogy: A World History (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), 35–50. No fewer 
than three revolutions in military technology took place before 500 b.c.e., and 
all of them seem to have emerged from the uncivilized fringe. The first was the 
“chariot revolution” at about 1700 b.c.e., which overran both Mesopotamia and 
Egypt and eventually hit China.
57. For a recent discussion of the Hellenistic “military revolution,” see S. Cuomo, 
Technology and Culture in Greek and Roman Antiquity (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2007), 41–76. On mechanical technology, see Andrew I. Wil-
son, “Machines in Greek and Roman Technology,” in The Oxford Handbook of 
Engineering and Technology in the Classical World, ed. John Peter Oleson (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2008), 336–366.
58. de Camp, Ancient Engineers, 83–171; Geoffrey Lloyd, Greek Science After Aristotle 
(London: Chatto and Windus, 1973); J. G. Landels, Engineering in the Ancient World 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978); Alan Hirshfeld, Eureka Man: The 
Life and Legacy of Archimedes (New York: Walker, 2009). One of the most spectacular 
examples of Hellenistic technology is a device known as the Antikythera Mecha-
nism, which was recovered from a sunken ship in the Aegean Sea in 1900 and 
is thought to date to the mid-first century b.c.e. at the latest. For a discussion of 
recent research on this artifact, described as a mechanical “planetarium,” and a 
depiction of a working model, see Robert Hannah, “Timekeeping,” in Oxford Hand-
book of Engineering and Technology in the Classical World, ed. Oleson, 744–746. The 
attribution of the crank to Hellenistic engineers is problematic, however, according 
to Lynn White, Medieval Technology and Social Change (London: Oxford University 
Press, 1962), 103–115. For the link between Archimedes and Galileo, see Donald 
Cardwell, The Norton History of Technology (New York: Norton, 1995), 83–84.
59. de Camp, Ancient Engineers, 130–138; Cardwell, Norton History of Technology, 
20–24. Fernand Braudel discussed Alexandrian Egypt as an abortive industrial 
revolution in The Perspective of the World, vol. 3 of Civilization and Capitalism, 
15th–18th Century, trans. Siân Reynolds (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1981), 543–544.
60. See, for example, Charles Freeman, The Greek Achievement: The Foundation of the 
Western World (New York: Viking Press, 1999), 372–388.
61. Chang concluded that “no significantly new technological invention has been 
archaeologically documented from the Neolithic into the Bronze Age. . . . The 
emergence of Bronze Age civilizations in China was not accompanied . . . by a 
significant use of metal farming implements, irrigation networks, any use of draft 
animals, or the use of the plough” (Archaeology of Ancient China, 364).
62. Kwang-Chih Chang, The Archaeology of Ancient China, 3rd ed. (New Haven, 
Conn.: Yale University Press, 1977), 350–357; Robert Temple, The Genius of 
China: 3,000 Years of Science, Discovery, and Invention (New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1986), 15–23; Headrick, Technology, 52–53.

5. mindscapes of the postglacial epoch        217
63. Mark Elvin, The Pattern of the Chinese Past (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University 
Press, 1973), 23–34.
64. Joseph Needham, The Development of Iron and Steel Technology in China (Cam-
bridge: Heffer, 1964); William H. McNeill, The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed 
Force, and Society Since a.d. 1000 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982), 
24–62; Arnold Pacey, Technology in World Civilization: A Thousand-Year History 
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1990), 1–6.
65. Joseph Needham, Science in Traditional China (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1981). See also Temple, Genius of China, 103–110, which depicts 
a model of Su Sung’s water-powered mechanical clock of 1092 (fig. 79). For a 
description of Chinese nautical technology, including watertight compartments 
and a magnetic compass, see Joseph Needham, The Shorter Science and Civilization 
in China, vol. 3 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986).
66. Elvin, Pattern of the Chinese Past, 91–110. The Chinese Communist Party seized 
control of the nation in 1949—after years of foreign invasion and civil war—in 
much the same manner as had earlier dynasties, and it explicitly emulated the 
Qin dynasty in expanding the power and reach of the central government in con-
cert with a state ideology. In recent decades, the Chinese leaders have loosened 
control of the economy to permit more rapid growth and have followed (less 
explicitly) the course of other dynasties like the Zhou and Han that exerted less 
rigid control over the provinces and cities.
67. McNeill, Pursuit of Power, 44–50; Mokyr, Lever of Riches, 231–238; Headrick, Tech-
nology, 72–73.
68. Jean Gimpel, The Medieval Machine: The Industrial Revolution of the Middle Ages 
(New York: Holt, 1976), 29–58; Fernand Braudel, The Structures of Everyday Life: 
The Limits of the Possible, vol. 1 of Civilization and Capitalism, 15th–18th Century, 
trans. Siân Reynolds (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981), 104–145.
69. McNeill, Pursuit of Power, 63–116; Mokyr, Lever of Riches, 231–238; David S. Lan-
des, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and Some So Poor (New 
York: Norton, 1999), 29–59.
70. Ernst Benz, Evolution and Christian Hope: Man’s Concept of the Future from the Early 
Fathers to Teilhard de Chardin, trans. Heinz G. Frank (Garden City, N.Y.: Double-
day, 1966); Lynn White, Medieval Religion and Technology: Collected Essays (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1978). See also Mokyr, Lever of Riches, 201–208.
71. Cardwell describes the attitude toward manual labor and technical matters in 
Norton History of Technology, 37. See also Mumford, Myth of the Machine, 263–267. 
For a discussion of the Judeo-Christian construction of time, see J. B. Bury, The 
Idea of Progress: An Inquiry into Its Origin and Growth (New York: Macmillan, 1932), 
20–29. Butterfield considers the importance of Saint Augustine’s writings on 
time and history in Origins of History, 180–184.
72. White, Medieval Technology and Social Change, 39–78; Gimpel, Medieval Machine, 
32–43; Headrick, Technology, 55–58.
73. Mumford, Myth of the Machine, 234–262. Although Mumford expressed skepti-
cism about the decline of slavery as a significant factor in accelerated technologi-
cal innovation, Gimpel noted a general correlation between the downward trend 
in slavery and the increase in water power in Medieval Machine, 10.

218         5. mindscapes of the postglacial epoch
74. Landels, Engineering in the Ancient World, 16–26. Headrick described the Roman 
hydropower complex at Barbegal in France (constructed in 310 c.e.), which com-
prised sixteen overshot wheels and was capable of grinding 3 tons of grain an 
hour, in Technology, 49–50. 
75. White, Medieval Technology and Social Change, 79–85; Gimpel, Medieval Machine, 
1–24.
76. Pacey, Technology in World Civilization, 10–12.
77. White, Medieval Technology and Social Change, 84–89; Gimpel, Medieval Machine, 
24–27. See also Lewis Mumford, Technics and Civilization (New York: Harcourt, 
Brace, 1934), 112–118. Windmills were so common by the last decade of the 
twelfth century that they were taxed by Pope Celestine III.
78. Mumford, Technics and Civilization, 132–134; David S. Landes, Revolution in Time: 
Clocks and the Making of the Modern World (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press, 1983), 53–66.
79. Arnold Pacey, The Maze of Ingenuity: Ideas and Idealism in the Development of Tech-
nology, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1992), 35–45.
80. Landes, Revolution in Time, 57.
81. Mumford, Technics and Civilization, 126; Landes, Wealth and Poverty of Nations, 
46–47.
82. Gimpel, Medieval Machine, 199–236. For an accessible account of this period, see 
Barbara W. Tuchman, A Distant Mirror: The Calamitous 14th Century (New York: 
Knopf, 1978).
83. Cardwell, Norton History of Technology, 49–56.
84. Braudel, Structures of Everyday Life, 385–397; McNeill, Pursuit of Power, 79–143.
85. Braudel, Structures of Everyday Life, 402–415.
86. Mumford, Technics and Civilization, 46.
87. See, for example, Cardwell, Norton History of Technology, 75–101. Contributions 
came from other parts of Europe as well, most notably from Nicolaus Coperni-
cus (1473–1543) in Poland.
88. Gimpel, Medieval Machine, 149.
89. Bury, Idea of Progress, 50–63.
90. For a brief but accessible overview, see Daniel J. Boorstin, The Discoverers: A His-
tory of Man’s Search to Know His World and Himself (New York: Random House, 
1983), 626–652.
91. William J. Sollas, Ancient Hunters and Their Modern Representatives (London: Mac-
millan, 1911). For a readable account of the European encounter with the native 
Australians, see Alan Moorehead, The Fatal Impact: An Account of the Invasion of 
the South Pacific, 1767–1840 (New York: Harper & Row, 1966).
92. Marvin Harris, The Rise of Anthropological Theory: A History of Theories of Culture 
(New York: Crowell, 1968), 149–179; Robert L. Kelly, The Foraging Spectrum: 
Diversity in Hunter-Gatherer Lifeways (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution 
Press, 1995), 6–10.
93. See, for example, Harris, Rise of Anthropological Theory, 80–107; and Bruce G. 
Trigger, A History of Archaeological Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1989), 111–114.

6. the vision animal        219
94. Kelly, Foraging Spectrum.
95. Peter Hiscock concluded that “economic, social, and ideological change was 
not restricted to the historical period or even recent millennia, but occurred 
throughout Australian pre-history. . . . [T]here were ongoing modifications to 
foraging practices, technology, settlement and territoriality, and to social prac-
tices and the nature of cosmology and belief” (Archaeology of Ancient Australia 
[London: Routledge, 2008], 284–285). See also Harry Lourandos, Continent of 
Hunter-Gatherers: New Perspectives in Australian Prehistory (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1997).
96. For example, Wendell H. Oswalt observed that the Aranda (Arunta), often con-
sidered the most technologically simple of the native Australian groups, manufac-
tured a throwing board spear composed of nine “techno-units,” or components, 
as well as untended facility in the form of an emu pit trap of four components 
(An Anthropological Analysis of Food-Getting Technology [New York: Wiley, 1976], 
236–237).
97. Robert McGhee, Ancient People of the Arctic (Vancouver: University of British 
Columbia Press, 1996).
6. The Vision Animal
1. 
Edward O. Wilson, The Insect Societies (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Har-
vard University Press, 1971); Bert Hölldobler and E. O. Wilson, The Super-Organ-
ism: The Beauty, Elegance, and Strangeness of Insect Societies (New York: Norton, 
2009), 5–10.
2. 
Hölldobler and Wilson, Super-Organism, 408–467. 
3. 
The eusocial rodents include the naked mole-rat (Heterocephalus glaber) and the 
Damaraland mole-rat (Cryptomys damarensis). See J. U. M. Jarvis, “Eusociality in 
a Mammal: Cooperative Breeding in Naked Mole-Rat Colonies,” Science 212 
(1981): 571–573; and M. Andersson, “The Evolution of Eusociality,” Annual 
Reviews of Ecological Systems 15 (1984): 165–189.
4. 
See, for example, George Gaylord Simpson, The Major Features of Evolution (New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1953), 177–179; and Niles Eldredge, Macro-Evolutionary 
Dynamics: Species, Niches, and Adaptive Peaks (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1989), 51–53.
5. 
See, for example, Ludwig von Bertalanffy, General System Theory: Foundations, 
Development, Applications (New York: Braziller, 1968). The study of complex bio-
logical systems is termed “bio-cybernetics.”
6. 
Hölldobler and Wilson, Super-Organism, 4–13. See also Douglas R. Hofstadter, 
Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid (New York: Basic Books, 1979), 
358–361.
7. 
R. G. Collingwood, The Idea of History (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1946), 88–93; 
Marvin Harris, The Rise of Anthropological Theory: A History of Theories of Culture 
(New York: Crowell, 1968), 80–141.
8. 
Collingwood, Idea of History, 209.
9. 
Bruce G. Trigger, “Childe’s Relevance to the 1990s,” in The Archaeology of V. 
Gordon Childe, ed. David R. Harris (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994), 
9–27.

220         6. the vision animal
10. Collingwood, Idea of History, 190–204.
11. Immanuel Kant, On History, ed. Lewis White Beck, trans. Lewis White Beck, 
Robert E. Anchor, and Emil L. Fackenheim (New York: Macmillan, 1963), 12.
12. Collingwood, Idea of History, 97. Concerning the collective and cumulative char-
acter of knowledge, Kant wrote that “a single man would have to live excessively 
long in order to learn to make full use of all his natural capacities. Since Nature 
has set only a short period for his life, she needs a perhaps unreckonable series of 
generations, each of which passes its own enlightenment to its successor in order 
finally to bring the seeds of enlightenment to that degree of development in our 
race which is completely suitable to Nature’s purpose” (“Idea for a Universal His-
tory from a Cosmopolitan Point of View,” trans. Beck, in On History, 13).
13. Kant’s view of history was presented in his short essay “Idea for a Universal 
History from a Cosmopolitan Point of View” (1784), published in Gothaische 
Gelehrte Zeitung and reprinted in Kant, On History, 11–26. Kant was by no means 
certain that progress would continue; he suggested that future progress might be 
obliterated by “barbarous devastation,” which seemed to be an eerie forecast of 
the massive military–industrial conflicts of the twentieth century.
14. Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Philosophy of History, trans. J. Sibree (New York: 
Barnes & Noble, 2004), 59. Hegel’s distinction between history and Nature was 
based on an erroneous view of the latter as static.
15. Ibid., 30
16. Collingwood, Idea of History, 113–122.
17. William H. McNeill, The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and Society Since 
a.d. 1000 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982), 63–143.
18. Mary Shelley described the genesis of her novel in the well-known author’s intro-
duction to Frankenstein (New York: Random House, 1993), xiii–xxi.
19. Ibid., xix.
20. Robert Hannah, “Timekeeping,” in The Oxford Handbook of Engineering and Tech-
nology in the Classical World, ed. John Peter Oleson (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2008), 744–746; Donald Cardwell, The Norton History of Technology (New 
York: Norton,  1995), 420–422.
21. Margaret A. Boden, Computer Models of Mind: Computational Approaches in Theo-
retical Psychology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988), and The Cre-
ative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms, 2nd ed. (London: Routledge, 2004).
22. Alan Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” Mind 59 (1950): 433–
460. Turing’s criterion for AI has long been referred to as the “Turing test.”
23. Ray Kurzweil, The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology (New York: 
Viking Press, 2005), 136. See also Ray Kurzweil, The Age of Spiritual Machines: 
When Computers Exceed Human Intelligence (New York: Viking Press, 1999).
24. K. Eric Drexler, Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology (New York: 
Anchor Books, 1986).
25. Kurzweil, Singularity Is Near, 299–367.
26. George B. Dyson, Darwin Among the Machines: The Evolution of Global Intelligence 
(Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1997), 211–228.

Bibliography
Abramova, Zoya  A. “Two Examples of Terminal Paleolithic Adaptations.” In From 
Kostenki to Clovis: Upper Paleolithic–Paleo-Indian Adaptations, edited by Olga Soffer and 
N. D. Praslov, 85–100. New York: Plenum Press, 1993.
Adams, Robert McC. The Evolution of Urban Society: Early Mesopotamia and Prehispanic 
Mexico. Chicago: Aldine, 1966.
——. Heartland of Cities: Surveys of Ancient Settlement and Land Use on the Central Floodplain 
of the Euphrates. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981.
——. Paths of Fire: An Anthropologist’s Inquiry into Western Technology. Princeton, N.J.: Prince-
ton University Press, 1996.
Adams, Robert McC., and Hans J. Nissen. The Uruk Countryside: The Natural Setting of 
Urban Societies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972.
Aiello, Leslie, and Christopher Dean. An Introduction to Human Evolutionary Anatomy. 
London: Academic Press, 1990.
Algaze, Guillermo. Ancient Mesopotamia at the Dawn of Civilization: The Evolution of an 
Urban Landscape. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008.
——. The Uruk World System: The Dynamics of Expansion of Early Mesopotamian Civilization. 
2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005.
Allman, John Morgan. Evolving Brains. New York: Scientific American Library, 1999.
Allsworth-Jones, Philip. “The Szeletian and the Stratigraphic Succession in Central 
Europe and Adjacent Areas: Main Trends, Recent Results, and Problems for Resolu-
tion.” In The Emergence of Modern Humans: An Archaeological Perspective, edited by Paul 
Mellars, 160–242. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1990.

222         bibliography
Ambrose, Stanley H. “Late Pleistocene Human Population Bottlenecks, Volcanic Win-
ter, and Differentiation of Modern Humans.” Journal of Human Evolution 34 (1998): 
623–651.
——. “Paleolithic Technology and Human Evolution.” Science 291 (2001): 1748–1753.
Anderson, Michael L. “Embodied Cognition: A Field Guide.” Artificial Intelligence 149 
(2003): 91–130.
Anderson-Gerfaud, Patricia. “Aspects of Behavior in the Middle Palaeolithic: Functional 
Analysis of Stone Tools from Southwest France.” In The Emergence of Modern Humans: 
An Archaeological Perspective, edited by Paul Mellars, 389–418. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 1990.
Andersson, Malte. “The Evolution of Eusociality.” Annual Reviews of Ecological Systems 15 
(1984): 165–189.
Ascher, Marcia, and Robert Ascher. Code of the Quipu: A Study in Media, Mathematics, and 
Culture. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1980.
Asfaw, Berhane, Yonas Beyene, Gen Suwa, Robert C. Walter, Tim D. White, Giday 
WoldeGabriel, and Tesfaye Yemane. “The Earliest Acheulean from Konso-Gardula.” 
Nature 360 (1992): 732–735.
Assmann, Jan. The Mind of Ancient Egypt: History and Meaning in the Time of the Pharaohs. 
New York: Metropolitan Books, 2002.
Bailey, Shara E., Timothy D. Weaver, and Jean-Jacques Hublin. “Who Made the Aurigna-
cian and Other Early Upper Paleolithic Industries?” Journal of Human Evolution 57 
(2009): 11–26.
Barkow, Jerome H., Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby, eds. The Adapted Mind: Evolution-
ary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Bar-Mathews, Miryam, and Avner Ayalon. “Climatic Conditions in the Eastern Mediter-
ranean During the Last Glacial (60–10 ky) and Their Relations to the Upper Pal-
aeolithic in the Levant as Inferred from Oxygen and Carbon Isotope Systematics of 
Cave Deposits.” In More Than Meets the Eye: Studies on Upper Palaeolithic Diversity in the 
Near East, edited by A. Nigel Goring-Morris and Anna Belfer-Cohen, 13–18. Oxford: 
Oxbow Books, 2003.
Bar-Yosef, Ofer. “The Middle and Early Upper Paleolithic in Southwest Asia and Neigh-
boring Regions.” In The Geography of Neandertals and Modern Humans in Europe and the 
Greater Mediterranean, edited by Ofer Bar-Yosef and David Pilbeam, 107–156. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography, 2000.
——. “The Natufian Culture in the Levant, Threshold to the Origins of Agriculture.” 
Evolutionary Anthropology 6 (1998): 159–177.
Bar-Yosef, Ofer, and Anna Belfer-Cohen. “From Africa to Eurasia—Early Dispersals.” 
Quaternary International 75 (2001): 19–28.
Becker, Ernest. The Denial of Death. New York: Free Press, 1973.
Bell, Charles. The Hand: Its Mechanism and Vital Endowments as Evincing Design. New York: 
Harper, 1840.
Bellwood, Peter. First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies. Malden, Mass.: Black-
well, 2005.
Benecke, Norbert. “Studies on Early Dog Remains from Northern Europe.” Journal of 
Archaeological Science 14 (1987): 31–49.

bibliography        223
Benz, Ernst. Evolution and Christian Hope: Man’s Concept of the Future from the Early Fathers 
to Teilhard de Chardin. Translated by Heinz G. Frank. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 
1966.
Bertalanffy, Ludwig von. General System Theory: Foundations, Development, Applications. 
New York: Braziller, 1968.
Beyries, Sylvia. “Functional Variability of Lithic Sets in the Middle Paleolithic.” In Upper 
Pleistocene Prehistory of Western Eurasia, edited by Harold L. Dibble and Anta Montet-
White, 213–224. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Museum, 1988.
Bickerton, Derek. Language and Human Behavior. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 
1995.
——. Language and Species. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990.
Binford, Lewis R., and Sally R. Binford. “A Preliminary Analysis of Functional Vari-
ability in the Mousterian of Levallois Facies.” American Anthropologist 68 (1966): 238–
295.
Boaretto, Elisabetta, Xiaohong Wu, Jiarong Yuan, Ofer Bar-Yosef, Vikki Chu, Yan Pan, 
Kexin Lu, et al. “Radiocarbon Dating of Charcoal and Bone Collagen Associated 
with Early Pottery at Yuchanyan Cave, Hunan Province, China.” Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 106 (2009): 9595–9600.
Boaz, Noel T., and Russell L. Ciochon. Dragon Bone Hill: An Ice-Age Saga of Homo erectus. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Bochenski, Zbigniew M., Teresa Tomek, Jarosław Wilczyński, Jir ˇí Svoboda, Krzysztof 
Wertz, and Piotr Wojtal. “Fowling During the Gravettian: The Avifauna of Pavlov I, 
Czech Republic.” Journal of Archaeological Science 36 (2009): 2655–2665.
Bocherens, Hervé, Dorothée G. Drucker, Daniel Billiou, Marylène Patou-Mathis, and 
Bernard Vandermeersch. “Isotopic Evidence for Diet and Subsistence Pattern of the 
Saint Cesaire I Neanderthal: Review and Use of a Multi-source Mixing Model.” Jour-
nal of Human Evolution 49 (2005): 71–87.
Boden, Margaret A. Computer Models of Mind: Computational Approaches in Theoretical Psy-
chology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
——. The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms. 2nd ed. London: Routledge, 2004.
Boëda, Eric. “Levallois: A Volumetric Construction, Methods, a Technique.” In The Defi-
nition and Interpretation of Levallois Technology, edited by Harold L Dibble and Ofer Bar-
Yosef, 41–68. Madison, Wis.: Prehistory Press, 1995.
Boëda, Eric, Jacques Connan, Daniel Dessort, Sultan Muhesen, Norbert Mercier, Hélène 
Valladas, and Nadine Tisnérat. “Bitumen as a Hafting Material on Middle Palaeoli-
thic Artefacts.” Nature 380 (1996): 336–338.
Bonin, Gerhardt von. The Evolution of the Human Brain. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1963.
Boorstin, Daniel J. The Discoverers: A History of Man’s Search to Know His World and Him-
self. New York: Random House, 1983.
Bordes, François. “Mousterian Cultures in France.” Science 134 (1961): 803–810.
——. Typologie du Paléolithique ancient et moyen. Bordeaux: Imprimeries Delmas, 1961.
Braudel, Fernand. The Perspective of the World. Vol. 3 of Civilization and Capitalism, 15th–
18th Century. Translated by Siân Reynolds. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1981.

224         bibliography
——. The Structures of Everyday Life: The Limits of the Possible. Vol. 1 of Civilization and Capi-
talism, 15th–18th Century. Translated by Siân Reynolds. Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1981.
Brunet, Michel, Franck Guy, David Pilbeam, Hassane Taisso Mackaye, Andossa Likius, 
Djimdoumalbaye Ahounta, Alain Beauvilain, et al. “A New Hominid from the Upper 
Miocene of Chad, Central Africa.” Nature 418 (2002): 145–801.
Bullock, Theodore Holmes, and G. Adrian Horridge. Structure and Function in the Nervous 
Systems of Invertebrates. San Francisco: Freeman, 1965.
Bunge, Mario. Emergence and Convergence: Qualitative Novelty and the Unity of Knowledge. 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2003. 
——. The Mind–Body Problem: A Psychobiological Approach. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1980.
Bunn, Henry T., and Ellen M. Kroll. “Systematic Butchery by Plio/Pleistocene Hominids 
at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania.” Current Anthropology 27 (1986): 431–452.
Bury, J. B. The Idea of Progress: An Inquiry into Its Origin and Growth. New York: Macmillan, 
1932.
Bush, Michael E., C. Owen Lovejoy, Donald C. Johanson, and Yves Coppens. “Hominid 
Carpal, Metacarpal, and Phalangeal Bones Recovered from the Hadar Formation: 
1974–1977 Collections.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 57 (1982): 651–677.
Butler, Samuel. The Shrewsbury Edition of the Works of Samuel Butler. Vol. 1. Edited by 
Henry Festing Jones. London: Cape, 1923.
Butterfield, Herbert. The Origins of History. New York: Basic Books, 1981.
Byrne, Richard, and Andrew Whiten, eds. Machiavellian Intelligence: Social Expertise and 
the Evolution of Intellect in Monkeys, Apes, and Humans. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1988.
Call, Josep, and Michael Tomasello. The Gestural Communication of Apes and Monkeys. 
Mahwah, N.J.: Erlbaum, 2007.
Callow, P. “The Lower and Middle Palaeolithic of Britain and Adjacent Areas of Europe.” 
Ph.D. diss., Cambridge University, 1976.
Calvin, William H. “The Unitary Hypothesis: A Common Neural Circuitry for Novel 
Manipulations, Language, Plan-Ahead, and Throwing?” In Tools, Language, and Cogni-
tion in Human Evolution, edited by Kathleen R. Gibson and Tim Ingold, 230–250. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Cardwell, Donald. The Norton History of Technology. New York: Norton, 1995.
Cartmill, Matt. “Rethinking Primate Origins.” Science 184 (1974): 436–443.
Cattelain, Pierre. “Un crochet de propulseur solutréen de la grotte de Combe-Saunière 1 
(Dordogne).” Bulletin de la Société préhistorique française 86 (1989): 213–216.
Chang, Kwang-Chih. The Archaeology of Ancient China. 3rd ed. New Haven, Conn.: Yale 
University Press, 1977.
——. The Archaeology of Ancient China. 4th ed. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 
1986.
Cheney, Dorothy L., and Robert S. Seyfarth. How Monkeys See the World: Inside the Mind of 
Another Species. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990.
Childe, V. Gordon. The Dawn of European Civilization. London: Kegan Paul, 1925.
——. History. London: Cobbett Press, 1947.
——. Man Makes Himself. London: Watts, 1936.

bibliography        225
——. New Light on the Most Ancient East: The Oriental Prelude to European Prehistory. London: 
Kegan Paul, 1934.
——. Piecing Together the Past: The Interpretation of Archaeological Data. New York: Praeger, 
1956.
——. The Prehistory of European Society. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1958.
——. “Races, Peoples, and Cultures in Prehistoric Europe.” History 18 (1933): 193–203.
——. “Retrospect.” Antiquity 32 (1958): 69–74.
——. Scotland Before the Scots. London: Methuen, 1946.
——. Social Evolution. London: Watts, 1951.
——. Society and Knowledge: The Growth of Human Traditions. New York: Harper, 1956.
——. “The Urban Revolution.” Town Planning Review 21 (1950): 3–17.
——. What Happened in History. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1942.
——. “Wheeled Vehicles.” In A History of Technology. Vol. 1, From Early Times to the Fall of 
Ancient Empires, edited by Charles Singer, Eric J. Holmyard, and A. R. Hall, 716–729. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1954.
Chomsky, Noam. Language and Mind. 3rd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2006.
——. Language and the Problems of Knowledge: The Managua Lectures. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 1988.
——. The Minimalist Program. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1995.
——. On Nature and Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Christiansen, Morten H., and Nick Chater. “Language as Shaped by the Brain.” Behav-
ioral and Brain Sciences 31 (2008): 489–558.
Clark, Grahame. Prehistoric Europe: The Economic Basis. London: Methuen, 1952.
——. World Prehistory in New Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977.
Clark, J. Desmond. “African and Asian Perspectives on the Origin of Modern Humans.” 
In The Origin of Modern Humans and the Impact of Chronometric Dating, edited by M. J. 
Aitken, C. B. Stringer, and P. A. Mellars, 148–178. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1993.
——. Kalambo Falls Prehistoric Site III: The Earlier Cultures: Middle and Earlier Stone Age. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Clark, W. E. Le Gros. History of the Primates. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1959.
Clarke, David L. Analytical Archaeology. 2nd ed. New York: Columbia University Press, 
1978.
Clottes, Jean. Chauvet Cave: The Art of Earliest Times. Salt Lake City: University of Utah 
Press, 2003.
Coe, Michael D. The Maya. 6th ed. New York: Thames and Hudson, 1999.
Collingwood, R. G. The Idea of History. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1946.
Conard, Nicholas J. “A Female Figurine from the Basal Aurignacian of Hohle Fels Cave 
in Southwestern Germany.” Nature 459 (2009): 248–252.
——. “Palaeolithic Ivory Sculptures from Southwestern Germany and the Origins of Figu-
rative Art.” Nature 426 (2003): 830–832.
Conard, Nicholas J., Maria Malina, and Susanne C. Münzel. “New Flutes Document the 
Earliest Musical Tradition in Southwestern Germany.” Nature 460 (2009): 727–740.
Conroy, Glenn C. Primate Evolution. New York: Norton, 1990.

226         bibliography
Coolidge, Frederick L., and Thomas Wynn. The Rise of Homo sapiens: The Evolution of 
Modern Thinking. Malden, Mass.: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.
——. “Working Memory, Its Executive Functions, and the Emergence of Modern Think-
ing.” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 15 (2005): 5–26.
Coon, Carleton S. The Origin of Races. New York: Knopf, 1963.
Corballis, Michael C. The Lopsided Ape: Evolution of the Generative Mind. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1991.
——. “Recursion as the Key to the Human Mind.” In From Mating to Mentality: Evaluating 
Evolutionary Psychology, edited by Kim Sterelny and Julie Fitness, 155–171. New York: 
Psychology Press, 2003.
Cosmides, Leda, and John Tooby. “Origins of Domain Specificity: The Evolution of 
Functional Organization.” In Mapping the Mind: Domain Specificity in Cognition and 
Culture, edited by Lawrence A. Hirschfield and Susan A. Gelman, 85–116. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
Cuomo, S. Technology and Culture in Greek and Roman Antiquity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2007.
Daniel, Glyn. The First Civilizations: The Archaeology of Their Origins. New York: Crowell, 1968.
Darwin, Charles. The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. 2nd ed. London: John 
Murray, 1875.
——. On the Origin of Species. London: John Murray, 1859.
Davidson, Iain, and William Noble. “The Archaeology of Depiction: Traces of Depiction 
and Language.” Current Anthropology 30 (1989): 125–155.
Dawkins, Richard. The Ancestor’s Tale: A Pilgrimage to the Dawn of Evolution. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 2004.
——. The Selfish Gene. New York: Oxford University Press, 1976.
Deacon, Terrence W. The Symbolic Species: The Co-Evolution of Language and the Brain. New 
York: Norton, 1997.
de Beaune, Sophie A., Frederick L. Coolidge, and Thomas Wynn, eds. Cognitive Archaeol-
ogy and Human Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
de Camp, L. Sprague. The Ancient Engineers. New York: Ballantine Books, 1963.
Deetz, James. In Small Things Forgotten: The Archaeology of American Life. Garden City, 
N.Y.: Anchor Books, 1977.
——. Invitation to Archaeology. Garden City, N.Y.: Natural History Press, 1967.
De Gusta, David, W. Henry Gilbert, and Scott P. Turner. “Hypoglossal Canal Size and 
Hominid Speech.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 96 (1999): 1800–1804.
de la Torre, Ignacio, Rafael Mora, Manuel Domínguez-Rodrigo, Luis de Luque, and Luis 
Alcalá. “The Oldowan Industry of Peninj and Its Bearing on the Reconstruction of 
the Technological Skills of Lower Pleistocene Hominids.” Journal of Human Evolution 
44 (2003): 203–224.
DeMarrais, Elizabeth, Chris Gosden, and Colin Renfrew, eds. Rethinking Materiality: 
The Engagement of Mind with the Material World. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for 
Archaeological Research, 2004.
Dennett, Daniel C. Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychology. Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 1978.
——. Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little, Brown, 1991.

bibliography        227
d’Errico, Francesco. “The Invisible Frontier: A Multiple Species Model for the Origin of 
Behavioral Modernity.” Evolutionary Anthropology 12 (2003): 188–202.
——. “Palaeolithic Origins of Artificial Memory Systems: An Evolutionary Perspective.” 
In Cognition and Material Culture: The Archaeology of Symbolic Storage, edited by Colin 
Renfrew and Chris Scarre, 19–50. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeologi-
cal Research, 1998.
d’Errico, Francesco, Christopher Henshilwood, Graeme Lawson, Marion Vanhaeren, 
Anne-Marie Tillier, Marie Soressi, Frédérique Bresson, et al. “Archaeological Evi-
dence for the Emergence of Language, Symbolism, and Music—An Alternative Multi-
disciplinary Perspective.” Journal of World Prehistory 17 (2003): 1–70.
d’Errico, Francesco, and April Nowell. “A New Look at the Berekhat Ram Figurine: 
Implications for the Origins of Symbolism.” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 10 
(2000): 123–167.
Descartes, René. Philosophical Works. 2 vols. Translated by Elizabeth  S. Haldane and 
G. R. T. Ross. New York: Dover, 1955.
Dolukhanov, Pavel, Dmitry Sokoloff, and Anvar Shukurov. “Radiocarbon Chronology 
of Upper Palaeolithic Sites in Eastern Europe at Improved Resolution.” Journal of 
Archaeological Science 28 (2001): 699–712.
Domínguez-Rodrigo, Manuel, and Travis  Rayne Pickering. “Early Hominid Hunting 
and Scavenging: A Zooarchaeological Review.” Evolutionary Anthropology 12 (2003): 
275–282.
Donald, Merlin. Origins of the Modern Mind: Three Stages in the Evolution of Culture and 
Cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1991.
Dretske, Fred. Explaining Behavior: Reasons in a World of Causes. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 1988.
Drexler, K. Eric. Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology. New York: Anchor 
Books, 1986.
Dunbar, Robin. Grooming, Gossip, and the Evolution of Language. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1996.
——. “The Social Brain Hypothesis.” Evolutionary Anthropology 6 (1998): 178–190.
Dyson, George B. Darwin Among the Machines: The Evolution of Global Intelligence. Read-
ing, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1997.
Edelman, Gerald M. Wider Than the Sky: The Phenomenal Gift of Consciousness. New Haven, 
Conn.: Yale University Press, 2004.
Edelman, Gerald M., and Giulio Tononi. A Universe of Consciousness: How Matter Becomes 
Imagination. New York: Basic Books, 2000.
Edwards, I. E. S. The Pyramids of Egypt. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1961.
Efimenko, P. P. Pervobytnoe obshchestvo. 2nd ed. Leningrad: USSR Academy of Sciences, 
1938.
Eldredge, Niles. Macro-Evolutionary Dynamics: Species, Niches, and Adaptive Peaks. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1989.
——. Time Frames: The Evolution of Punctuated Equilibria. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1985.
Elvin, Mark. The Pattern of the Chinese Past. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 
1973.

228         bibliography
Emmorey, Karen, Sonya Mehta, and Thomas J. Grabowski. “The Neural Correlates of 
Sign Versus Word Production.” NeuroImage 36 (2007): 202–208.
Enard, Wolfgang, Molly Przeworski, Simon E. Fisher, Cecelia S. L. Lai, Victor Wiebe, 
Takashi Kitano, Anthony P. Monaco, and Svante Paabo. “Molecular Evolution of 
FOXP2, a Gene Involved in Speech and Language.” Nature 418 (2002): 869–872.
Fagan, Brian. Floods, Famines, and Emperors: El Niño and the Fate of Civilizations. New York: 
Basic Books, 1999.
——. The Journey from Eden: The Peopling of Our World. London: Thames and Hudson, 1990.
——. The Long Summer: How Climate Changed Civilization. New York: Basic Books, 2004.
Fedele, Francesco G., Biagio Giaccio, and Irka Hajdas. “Timescales and Cultural Pro-
cesses at 40,000 bp in the Light of the Campanian Ignimbrite Eruption, Western 
Eurasia.” Journal of Human Evolution 55 (2008): 834–857.
Fine, Cordelia, ed. The Britannica Guide to the Brain. London: Constable and Robinson, 
2008.
Finley, M. I. The Ancient Economy. 2nd ed., updated. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1999.
Firth, Raymond. Symbols: Public and Private. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 
1973.
Fitch, W. Tecumseh. “The Evolution of Speech: A Comparative Review.” Trends in Cogni-
tive Sciences 4 (2000): 258–267.
Fitch, W. Tecumseh, and Marc D. Hauser. “Computational Constraints on Syntactic 
Processing in a Nonhuman Primate.” Science 303 (2004): 377–380.
Fodor, Jerry A. The Mind Doesn’t Work That Way: Scope and Limits of Computational Psychol-
ogy. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000.
——. The Modularity of Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1983.
Foley, Robert, and Marta Mirazon Lahr. “On Stony Ground: Lithic Technology, Human 
Evolution, and the Emergence of Culture.” Evolutionary Anthropology 12 (2003): 
109–122.
Freeman, Charles. The Greek Achievement: The Foundation of the Western World. New York: 
Viking Press, 1999.
Frisch, Karl von. The Dance Language and Orientation of Bees. Translated by Leigh E. Chad-
wick. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967.
Galik, K., B. Senut, M. Pickford, D. Gommery, J. Treil, A. J. Kuperavage, and R. B. 
Eckhardt. “External and Internal Morphology of the BAR 1002’00 Orrorin tugenensis 
Femur.” Science 305 (2004): 1450–1453.
Gamble, Clive. Origins and Revolutions: Human Identity in Earliest Prehistory. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2007.
——. The Palaeolithic Settlement of Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.
——. The Palaeolithic Societies of Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
——. Timewalkers: The Prehistory of Global Colonization. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1994.
Gans, C., and G. Northcutt. “Neural Crest and the Origin of the Vertebrates: A New 
Head.” Science 220 (1983): 268–273.
Gathercole, Peter. “Childe’s Revolutions.” In Archaeology: The Key Concepts, edited by 
Colin Renfrew and Paul Bahn, 35–41. Abingdon: Routledge, 2005.

bibliography        229
Germonpré, Mietje, Mikhail V. Sablin, Rhiannon E. Stevens, Robert E.  M. Hedges, 
Michael Hofreiter, Mathias Stiller, and Viviane R. Després. “Fossil Dogs and Wolves 
from Palaeolithic Sites in Belgium, the Ukraine, and Russia: Osteometry, Ancient 
DNA, and Stable Isotopes.” Journal of Archaeological Science 36 (2009): 473–490.
Gimpel, Jean. The Medieval Machine: The Industrial Revolution of the Middle Ages. New York: 
Holt, 1976.
Goebel, Ted. “The Pleistocene Colonization of Siberia and Peopling of the Americas: An 
Ecological Approach.” Evolutionary Anthropology 8 (1999): 208–227.
Goldberg, Elkhonon. The New Executive Brain: Frontal Lobes in a Complex World. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2009.
Golovanova, Liubov V., Vladimir B. Doronichev, Naomi E. Cleghorn, Marianna A. Kulkova, 
Tatiana V. Sapelko, and M. Steven Shackley. “Significance of Ecological Factors in 
the Middle to Upper Paleolithic Transition.” Current Anthropology 51 (2010): 655–691.
Goodall, Jane. In the Shadow of Man. London: Collins, 1971.
Gosden, Christopher. Social Being and Time. Oxford: Blackwell, 1994.
Gowlett, John A. J. “The Elements of Design Form in Acheulian Bifaces: Modes, Modali-
ties, Rules and Language.” In Axe Age: Acheulian Tool-making from Quarry to Discard, 
edited by Naama Goren-Inbar and Gonen Sharon, 203–221. London: Equinox, 
2006.
Graf, Kelly E. “The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Evaluating the Radiocarbon Chro-
nology of the Middle and Late Upper Paleolithic in the Enisei River Valley, South-
Central Siberia.” Journal of Archaeological Science 36 (2009): 694–707.
Green, Richard E., Johannes Krause, Adrian W. Briggs, Tomislav Maricic, Udo Stenzel, 
Martin Kircher, Nick Patterson, et al. “A Draft Sequence of the Neandertal Genome.” 
Science 328 (2010): 710–722
Green, Sally. Prehistorian: A Biography of V. Gordon Childe. Bradford-on-Avon: Moonraker 
Press, 1981.
Greene, Kevin. “Technological Innovation and Economic Progress in the Ancient World: 
M. I. Finley Reconsidered.” Economic History Review, n.s., 53 (2000): 29–59.
——. “V. Gordon Childe and the Vocabulary of Revolutionary Change.” Antiquity 73 
(1999): 97–109.
Greenfield, Patricia M. “Language, Tools, and Brain: The Ontogeny and Phylogeny 
of Hierarchically Organized Sequential Behavior.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 14 
(1991): 531–595.
Hagoort, Peter, Lea Hald, Marcel Bastiaansen, and Karl Magnus Petersson. “Integration 
of Word Meaning and World Knowledge in Language Comprehension.” Science 304 
(2004): 438–441.
Haidle, Miriam Noël. “How to Think a Spear.” In Cognitive Archaeology and Human Evo-
lution, edited by Sophie A. de Beaune, Frederick L. Coolidge, and Thomas Wynn, 
57–73. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Hannah, Robert. “Timekeeping.” In The Oxford Handbook of Engineering and Technology in 
the Classical World, edited by John Peter Oleson, 740–758. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2008.
Hapgood, Philip J., and Natalie R. Franklin. “The Revolution That Didn’t Arrive: A 
Review of Pleistocene Sahul.” Journal of Human Evolution 55 (2008): 187–222.

230         bibliography
Hardy, Bruce L., Marvin Kay, Anthony E. Marks, and Katherine Monigal. “Stone Tool 
Function at the Paleolithic Sites of Starosele and Buran Kaya III, Crimea: Behav-
ioral Implications.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98 (2001): 10972–
10977.
Harris, Marvin. The Rise of Anthropological Theory: A History of Theories of Culture. New 
York: Crowell, 1968.
Hauser, Marc D., Noam Chomsky, and W. Tecumseh Fitch. “The Faculty of Language: 
What Is It, Who Has It, and How Did It Evolve?” Science 298 (2002): 1569–1579.
Headrick, Daniel R. Technology: A World History. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. Philosophy of History. Translated by J. Sibree. New York: 
Barnes & Noble, 2004.
Heidegger, Martin. The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays. Translated by Wil-
liam Lovitt. New York: Harper & Row, 1977.
Henshilwood, Christopher. “Fully Symbolic Sapiens Behaviour: Innovation in the Middle 
Stone Age at Blombos Cave, South Africa.” In Rethinking the Human Revolution: New 
Behavioural and Biological Perspectives on the Origin and Dispersal of Modern Humans, 
edited by Paul Mellars, Katie Boyle, Ofer Bar-Yosef, and Chris Stringer, 123–132. 
Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, 2007.
Henshilwood, Christopher, and Curtis W. Marean. “The Origin of Modern Human 
Behavior: Critique of the Models and Their Test Implications.” Current Anthropology 
44 (2003): 627–651.
Hewes, Gordon W. “A History of Speculation on the Relation Between Tools and Lan-
guage.” In Tools, Language and Cognition in Human Evolution, edited by Kathleen R. 
Gibson and Tim Ingold, 20–31. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Hillman, Gordon C. “Late Pleistocene Changes in Wild Plant Foods Available to Hunter-
Gatherers of the Northern Fertile Crescent: Possible Preludes to Cereal Cultivation.” 
In The Origins and Spread of Agriculture and Pastoralism in Eurasia, edited by David R. 
Harris, 159–203. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1996.
Hillman, Gordon C., and M. Stuart Davies. “Measured Domestication Rates in Wild 
Wheat and Barley Under Primitive Cultivation and Their Archaeological Implica-
tions.” Journal of World Prehistory 4 (1990): 157–222.
Hirshfeld, Alan. Eureka Man: The Life and Legacy of Archimedes. New York: Walker, 2009.
Hiscock, Peter. Archaeology of Ancient Australia. London: Routledge, 2008.
Hobbes, Thomas. Leviathan, or the Matter, Forme and Power of a Common-wealth Ecclesiasti-
call and Civill. London: Penguin, 1968.
Hodder, Ian. Reading the Past: Current Approaches to Interpretation in Archaeology. 2nd ed. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
——. “Theoretical Archaeology: A Reactionary View.” In Symbolic and Structural Archaeol-
ogy, edited by Ian Hodder, 12–13. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Hoffecker, John F. Desolate Landscapes: Ice-Age Settlement of Eastern Europe. New Bruns-
wick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 2002.
——. “The Eastern Gravettian ‘Kostenki Culture’ as an Arctic Adaptation.” Anthropological 
Papers of the University of Alaska, n.s., 2 (2002): 115–136.
——. “Innovation and Technological Knowledge in the Upper Paleolithic of Northern 
Eurasia.” Evolutionary Anthropology 14 (2005): 186–198.

bibliography        231
——. A Prehistory of the North: Human Settlement of the Higher Latitudes. New Brunswick, 
N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 2005.
——. “Representation and Recursion in the Archaeological Record.” Journal of Archaeologi-
cal Method and Theory 14 (2007): 370–375.
——. “The Spread of Modern Humans in Europe.” Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 106 (2009): 16040–16045.
Hoffecker, John F., and Scott A. Elias. Human Ecology of Beringia. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2007.
Hoffecker, John F., Vance T. Holliday, Mikhail V. Anikovich, Andrei A. Sinitsyn, V. V. 
Popov, S. N. Lisitsyn, G. M. Levkovskaya, G. A. Pospelova, S. L. Forman, and B. Giac-
cio. “From the Bay of Naples to the River Don: The Campanian Ignimbrite Eruption 
and the Middle to Upper Paleolithic Transition in Eastern Europe.” Journal of Human 
Evolution 55 (2008): 858–870.
Hoffecker, John F., I.  E. Kuz’mina, E.  V. Syromyatnikova, Mikhail  V. Anikovich, 
Andrei A. Sinitsyn, V. V. Popov, and Vance T. Holliday. “Evidence for Kill-Butchery 
Events of Early Upper Paleolithic Age at Kostenki, Russia.” Journal of Archaeological 
Science 37 (2010): 1073–1089.
Hofstadter, Douglas R. Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid. New York: Basic 
Books, 1979.
Hole, Frank. “Environmental Instabilities and Urban Origins.” In Chiefdoms and Early 
States in the Near East: The Organizational Dynamics of Complexity, edited by Gil Stein 
and Mitchell S. Rothman, 121–143. Madison, Wis.: Prehistory Press, 1994.
Hölldobler, Bert, and E. O. Wilson, The Super-Organism: The Beauty, Elegance, and Strange-
ness of Insect Societies. New York: Norton, 2009.
Holliday, Trenton W. “Brachial and Crural Indices of European Late Upper Paleolithic 
and Mesolithic Humans.” Journal of Human Evolution 36 (1999): 549–566.
——. “Postcranial Evidence of Cold Adaptation in European Neandertals.” American Jour-
nal of Physical Anthropology 104 (1997): 245–258.
Holliday, Vance T., John F. Hoffecker, Paul Goldberg, Richard I. Macphail, Steven L. 
Forman, Mikhail Anikovich, and Andrei Sinitsyn. “Geoarchaeology of the Kostenki–
Borshchevo Sites, Don River Valley, Russia.” Geoarchaeology: An International Journal 
22 (2007): 181–228.
Holloway, Ralph L. “Brief Communication: How Much Larger Is the Relative Volume of 
Area 10 of the Prefrontal Cortex in Humans?” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 
118 (2002): 399–401.
——. “Culture: A Human Domain.” Current Anthropology 10 (1969): 395–412.
——. “The Poor Brain of Homo sapiens neanderthalensis: See What You Please  .  .  .” In 
Ancestors: The Hard Evidence, edited by Eric Delson, 319–324. New York: Liss, 
1985.
Holloway, Ralph L., Chet S. Sherwood, Patrick R. Hof, and James K. Rilling. “Evolution 
of the Brain in Humans—Paleoneurology.” In Encyclopedia of Neuroscience, edited by 
Mark D. Binder, Nobutaka Hirokawa, and Uwe Windhorst, 1326–1334. New York: 
Springer, 2009.
Hughes, Thomas P. Human-Built World: How to Think About Technology and Culture. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 2004.

232         bibliography
Isaac, Glynn Ll. Olorgesailie: Archeological Studies of a Middle Pleistocene Lake Basin in Kenya. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1977.
Jarvis, J. U. M. “Eusociality in a Mammal: Cooperative Breeding in Naked Mole-Rat 
Colonies.” Science 212 (1981): 571–573.
Jelinek, Arthur J. “The Lower Paleolithic: Current Evidence and Interpretation.” Annual 
Review of Anthropology 6 (1977): 11–32.
Jones, Martin. “Moving North: Archaeobotanical Evidence for Plant Diet in Middle and 
Upper Paleolithic Europe.” In The Evolution of Hominin Diets: Integrating Approaches 
to the Study of Palaeolithic Subsistence, edited by Jean-Jacques Hublin and Michael P. 
Richards, 171–180. Dordrecht: Springer, 2009.
Jones, Rhys. “East of Wallace’s Line: Issues and Problems in the Colonisation of the 
Australian Continent.” In The Human Revolution: Behavioural and Biological Perspectives 
on the Origins of Modern Humans, edited by Paul Mellars and Chris Stringer, 743–782. 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1989.
Kant, Immanuel. On History. Edited by Lewis White Beck. Translated by Lewis White 
Beck, Robert E. Anchor, and Emil L. Fackenheim. New York: Macmillan, 1963.
Kasarda, John D. “The Structural Implications of Social System Size: A Three-Level Anal-
ysis.” American Sociological Review 39 (1974): 19–28.
Kay, Richard F., Matt Cartmill, and Michelle Balow. “The Hypoglossal Canal and the 
Origin of Human Vocal Behavior.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 95 
(1988): 5417–5419.
Keally, Charles T., Yasuhiro Taniguchi, and Yaroslav V. Kuzmin. “Understanding the 
Beginnings of Pottery Technology in Japan and Neighboring East Asia.” Review of 
Archaeology 24 (2003): 3–14.
Keeley, Lawrence  H. “Microwear Analysis of Lithics.” In The Lower Paleolithic Site at 
Hoxne, England, edited by Ronald Singer, Bruce G. Gladfelter, and John J. Wymer, 
129–138. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993.
Keeley, Lawrence H., and Nicholas Toth. “Microwear Polishes on Early Stone Tools from 
Koobi Fora, Kenya.” Nature 293 (1981): 464–466.
Kelly, Robert L. The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in Hunter-Gatherer Lifeways. Washington, 
D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1995.
Kemp, Barry J. Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilization. London: Routledge, 1989.
Kilbride-Jones, Howard. “From Mr Howard Kilbride-Jones, 6 April 1992.” In The Archae-
ology of V. Gordon Childe, edited by David R. Harris, 135–139. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1994.
Kim, Jaegwon. Philosophy of Mind. 2nd ed. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 2006.
Kingdon, Jonathan. Lowly Origin: Where, When, and Why Our Ancestors First Stood Up. 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2003.
Kirch, Patrick Vinton. On the Road of the Winds: An Archaeological History of the Pacific 
Islands Before European Contact. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000.
Klein, Richard G. The Human Career: Human Biological and Cultural Origins. 2nd ed. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
——. The Human Career: Human Biological and Cultural Origins. 3rd ed. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2009.
——. Man and Culture in the Late Pleistocene: A Case Study. San Francisco: Chandler, 1969.

bibliography        233
Knecht, Heidi. “Splits and Wedges: The Techniques and Technology of Early Aurigna-
cian Antler Working.” In Before Lascaux: The Complex Record of the Early Upper Paleo-
lithic, edited by Heidi Knecht, Anne Pike-Tay, and Randall White, 137–162. Boca 
Raton, Fla.: CRC Press, 1993.
Kozlowski, Janusz K. “The Gravettian in Central and Eastern Europe.” In Advances in 
World Archaeology, edited by Fred Wendorf and Angela E. Close, 5:131–200. Orlando, 
Fla.: Academic Press, 1986.
Kramer, Samuel Noah. The Sumerians: Their History, Culture, and Character. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1963.
Kuhn, Steven L., and Amilcare Bietti. “The Late Middle and Early Upper Paleolithic in 
Italy.” In The Geography of Neandertals and Modern Humans in Europe and the Greater 
Mediterranean, edited by Ofer Bar-Yosef and David Pilbeam, 49–76. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, 2000.
Kuhn, Steven L., Mary C. Stiner, Erksin Güleç, Ismail Özer, Hakan Yılmaz, Ismail 
Baykara, Ayşen Açıkkol, et al. “The Early Upper Paleolithic Occupations at Üçağizli 
Cave (Hatay, Turkey).” Journal of Human Evolution 56 (2009): 87–113.
Kurzweil, Ray. The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human Intelligence. 
New York: Viking Press, 1999.
——. The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology. New York: Viking Press, 2005.
Kyriacou, Andreas. “Innovation and Creativity: A Neuropsychological Perspective.” In 
Cognitive Archaeology and Human Evolution, edited by Sophie A. de Beaune, Freder-
ick L. Coolidge, and Thomas Wynn, 15–24. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2009.
Laitman, Jeffrey. “The Anatomy of Human Speech.” Natural History, August 1984, 20–27.
Landels, J. G. Engineering in the Ancient World. Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1978.
Landes, David S. Revolution in Time: Clocks and the Making of the Modern World. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1983.
——. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So Rich and Some So Poor. New York: 
Norton, 1999.
Langdon, John H. The Human Strategy: An Evolutionary Perspective on Human Anatomy. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Lavan, Luke. “Explaining Technological Change: Innovation, Stagnation, Recession and 
Replacement.” In Technology in Transition, a.d. 300–650, edited by Luke Lavan, Enrico 
Zanini, and Alexander Sarantis, xv–xl. Leiden: Brill, 2007.
Leach, Edmund. Claude Lévi-Strauss. New York: Viking Press, 1970.
Leakey, Mary D. Olduvai Gorge. Vol. 3, Excavations in Beds I and II, 1960–1963. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971.
Leakey, Meave  G., Craig  S. Feibel, Ian MacDougall, and Alan Walker. “New Four-
Million-Year-Old Hominid Species from Kanapoi and Allia Bay, Kenya.” Nature 376 
(1995): 565–571.
LeDoux, Joseph. Synaptic Self: How Our Brains Become Who We Are. New York: Penguin, 
2002.
Leroi-Gourhan, André. Le Geste et la parole. Vol. 1, Technique et langage. Paris: Albin 
Michel, 1964.

234         bibliography
——. Le Geste et la parole. Vol. 2, La Mémoire et les rythmes. Paris: Albin Michel, 1965.
——. Gesture and Speech. Translated by Anna  Bostock Berger. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 1993.
Lévi-Strauss, Claude. The Raw and the Cooked: Introduction to a Science of Mythology: Vol. 1. 
Translated by John Weightman and Doreen Weightman. New York: Harper & Row, 
1969.
——. The Savage Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966.
——. Structural Anthropology. Translated by Claire Jacobson and Brooke Grundfest Scho-
epf. New York: Basic Books, 1963.
Levitin, Daniel J. This Is Your Brain on Music: The Science of a Human Obsession. New York: 
Penguin, 2006.
Lewin, Roger, and Robert A. Foley. Principles of Human Evolution. Malden, Mass.: Black-
well, 2004.
Lewontin, Richard C. The Genetic Basis of Evolutionary Change. New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press, 1974.
Lieberman, Daniel E. “Speculations About the Selective Basis for Modern Human Cra-
niofacial Form.” Evolutionary Anthropology 17 (2008): 55–68.
Lieberman, Philip. The Biology and Evolution of Language. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1984.
——. Eve Spoke: Human Language and Human Evolution. New York: Norton, 1998.
Lindberg, David C. The Beginnings of Western Science: The European Scientific Tradition in 
Philosophical, Religious, and Institutional Context, 600 b.c. to a.d. 1450. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1992.
Lloyd, Geoffrey. Greek Science After Aristotle. London: Chatto and Windus, 1973.
Lombard, Marlize. “Evidence of Hunting and Hafting During the Middle Stone Age at 
Sibudu Cave, KwaZulu-Natal: A Multianalytical Approach.” Journal of Human Evolu-
tion 48 (2005): 279–300.
——. “The Gripping Nature of Ochre: The Association of Ochre with Howiesons Poort 
Adhesives and Later Stone Age Mastics from South Africa.” Journal of Human Evolu-
tion 53 (2007): 406–419.
Lordkipanidze, David, Tea Jashashvili, Abesalom Vekua, Marcia S. Ponce de León, Chris-
toph P. E. Zollikofer, G. Philip Rightmire, Herman Pontzer, et al. “Postcranial Evi-
dence from Early Homo from Dmanisi, Georgia.” Nature 449 (2007): 305–310.
Lourandos, Harry. Continent of Hunter-Gatherers: New Perspectives in Australian Prehistory. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Lucas, A., and J. R. Harris. Ancient Egyptian Materials and Industries. 4th ed. London: 
Arnold, 1962.
Lycett, Stephen J. “Are Victoria West Cores ‘Proto-Levallois’? A Phylogenetic Assess-
ment.” Journal of Human Evolution 56 (2009): 175–191.
Maisels, Charles Keith. Early Civilizations of the Old World: The Formative Histories of Egypt, 
the Levant, Mesopotamia, India, and China. London: Routledge, 1999.
Mania, Dietrich, and Ursula Mania. “Deliberate Engravings on Bone Artefacts of Homo 
erectus.” Rock Art Research 5 (1988): 91–107.
Mania, Ursula “The Utilisation of Large Mammal Bones in Bilzingsleben—A Special 
Variant of Middle Pleistocene Man’s Relationship to His Environment.” ERAUL 62 
(1995): 239–246.

bibliography        235
Marks, Anthony E., and C. Reid Ferring. “The Early Upper Paleolithic of the Levant.” 
In The Early Upper Paleolithic: Evidence from Europe and the Near East, edited by John F. 
Hoffecker and Cornelia  A. Wolf, 43–72. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports, 
1988.
Marr, David. Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation and Pro-
cessing of Visual Information. San Francisco: Freeman, 1982.
Marshack, Alexander. The Roots of Civilization: The Cognitive Beginnings of Man’s First Art, 
Symbol and Notation. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1972.
Martin, Robert. Primate Origins and Evolution: A Phylogenetic Reconstruction. Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1990.
Marx, Karl, and Frederick Engels. The German Ideology. Part One. Edited by C. J. Arthur. 
New York: International Publishers, 1947.
Marzke, Mary W. “Joint Function and Grips of the Australopithecus afarensis Hand, with 
Special Reference to the Region of the Capitate.” Journal of Human Evolution 12 
(1983): 197–211.
Maslin, Keith T. An Introduction to the Philosophy of Mind. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Polity, 2007.
Mayr, Ernst. The Growth of Biological Thought: Diversity, Evolution, and Inheritance. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1982.
Mayr, Ernst, and William B. Provine, eds. The Evolutionary Synthesis: Perspectives on the 
Unification of Biology. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980.
McBrearty, Sally, and Alison S. Brooks. “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpre-
tation of the Origin of Modern Human Behavior.” Journal of Human Evolution 39 
(2000): 453–563.
McGhee, Robert. Ancient People of the Arctic. Vancouver: University of British Columbia 
Press, 1996.
McGrew, William. The Cultured Chimpanzee: Reflections on Cultural Primatology. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
McLeish, John. The Story of Numbers: How Mathematics Shaped Civilization. New York: 
Fawcett Columbine, 1991.
McNeill, J. R., and William H. McNeill. The Human Web: A Bird’s-Eye View of World His-
tory. New York: Norton, 2003.
McNeill, William H. Plagues and Peoples. Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Books, 1976.
——. The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and Society Since a.d. 1000. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1982.
McPherron, Shannon P. “What Typology Can Tell Us About Acheulian Handaxe Pro-
duction.” In Axe Age: Acheulian Tool-making from Quarry to Discard, edited by Naama 
Goren-Inbar and Gonen Sharon, 267–285. London: Equinox, 2006.
Mednick, Sarnoff A. “The Associative Basis of the Creative Process.” Psychological Review 
(1962): 220–232.
Mellars, Paul. “Going East: New Genetic and Archaeological Perspectives on the Modern 
Human Colonization of Eurasia.” Science 313 (2006): 796–800.
——. The Neanderthal Legacy: An Archaeological Perspective from Western Europe. Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1996.
Minsky, Marvin. The Society of Mind. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1986.
Mitcham, Carl. Thinking Through Technology: The Path Between Engineering and Philosophy. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.

236         bibliography
Mitcham, Carl, and Robert Mackey, eds. Philosophy and Technology: Readings in the Philo-
sophical Problems of Technology. New York: Free Press, 1983.
Mithen, Steven. The Prehistory of the Mind: The Cognitive Origins of Art, Religion and Science. 
London: Thames and Hudson, 1996.
Mokyr, Joel. The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1990.
Monahan, Christoph M. “New Zooarchaeological Data from Bed II, Olduvai Gorge, Tan-
zania: Implications for Hominid Behavior in the Early Pleistocene.” Journal of Human 
Evolution 31 (1996): 93–128.
Moore, A. M. T., G. C. Hillman, and A. J. Legge. Village on the Euphrates: From Foraging to 
Farming at Abu Hureyra. London: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Moorehead, Alan. The Fatal Impact: An Account of the Invasion of the South Pacific, 1767–
1840. New York: Harper & Row, 1966.
More, Thomas. Utopia. Translated by Paul Turner. London: Penguin, 1965.
Mountcastle, Vernon B. Perceptual Neuroscience: The Cerebral Cortex. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1998.
——. The Sensory Hand: Neural Mechanisms of Somatic Sensation. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 2005.
Moyà-Solà, Salvador, and Meike Köhler. “A Dryopithecus Skeleton and the Origin of 
Great-Ape Locomotion.” Nature 379 (1996): 156–159.
Mumford, Lewis. The Myth of the Machine: Technics and Human Development. New York: 
Harcourt, Brace & World, 1967.
——. Technics and Civilization. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1934.
Nabokov, Vladimir. Lolita. New York: Putnam, 1955.
——. Speak, Memory: An Autobiography Revisited. New York: Vintage, 1967.
Napier, John. “The Evolution of the Hand.” Scientific American 207 (1962): 56–62.
——. “Fossil Hand Bones from Olduvai Gorge.” Nature 196 (1962): 409–411.
——. Hands. New York: Pantheon Books, 1980.
——. Hands. Revised by Russell H. Tuttle. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 
1993.
Needham, Joseph. The Development of Iron and Steel Technology in China. Cambridge: Hef-
fer, 1964.
——. Science and Civilization in China. Vol. 4, part 2, Mechanical Engineering. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1965.
——. Science in Traditional China. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981.
——. The Shorter Science and Civilization in China. Vol. 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1986.
Nitecki, Matthew H., ed. Evolutionary Innovations. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1990.
Noble, William, and Iain Davidson. “The Evolutionary Emergence of Modern Human 
Behaviour: Language and Its Archaeology.” Man 26 (1991): 223–253.
——. Human Evolution, Language and Mind: A Psychological and Archaeological Inquiry. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Oleson, John Peter, ed. The Oxford Handbook of Engineering and Technology in the Classical 
World. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.

bibliography        237
Osborn, Henry Fairfield. Men of the Old Stone Age: Their Environment, Life, and Art. New 
York: Scribner, 1915.
Oswalt, Wendell H. An Anthropological Analysis of Food-Getting Technology. New York: 
Wiley, 1976.
Pacey, Arnold. The Maze of Ingenuity: Ideas and Idealism in the Development of Technology. 
2nd ed. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1992.
——. Technology in World Civilization: A Thousand-Year History. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 1990.
Parker, G. H. The Elementary Nervous System. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1919.
Pearson, Osbjorn M. “Statistical and Biological Definitions of ‘Anatomically Modern’ 
Humans: Suggestions for a Unified Approach to Modern Morphology.” Evolutionary 
Anthropology 17 (2008): 38–48.
Pelegrin, Jacques. “Cognition and the Emergence of Language: A Contribution from 
Lithic Technology.” In Cognitive Archaeology and Human Evolution, edited by Sophie A. 
de Beaune, Frederick L. Coolidge, and Thomas Wynn, 95–108. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2009.
Perrot, Jean. “Le gisement natoufien de Mallaha (Eynan), Israel.” L’Anthropologie 70 
(1966): 437–484.
Petraglia, Michael D. “The Lower Palaeolithic of India and Its Bearing on the Asian 
Record.” In Early Human Behaviour in Global Context: The Rise and Diversity of the Lower 
Paleolithic Record, edited by Michael D. Petraglia and Ravi Korisettar, 343–390. Lon-
don: Routledge, 1998.
Peyrony, Denis. Élements de préhistoire. Ussel: Jacques Eyboulet, 1934.
Piaget, Jean. Structuralism. Translated by Chaninah Maschler. New York: Harper & Row, 
1970.
Pidoplichko, I. G. Mezhirichskie zhilishcha iz Kostei Mamonta. Kiev: Naukova dumka, 1976.
——. Pozdnepaleoliticheskie zhilishcha iz kostei mamonta na Ukraine. Kiev: Naukova dumka, 
1969.
Piggott, Stuart. The Earliest Wheeled Transport: From the Atlantic Coast to the Caspian Sea. 
London: Thames and Hudson, 1983.
Pinker, Steven. How the Mind Works. New York: Norton, 1997.
Pinker, Steven, and Jacques Mehler. Connections and Symbols. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT 
Press, 1988.
Piperno, Dolores R., Ehud Weiss, Irene Holst, and Dani Nadel. “Processing of Wild 
Cereal Grains in the Upper Palaeolithic Revealed by Starch Grain Analysis.” Nature 
430 (2005): 670–673.
Pitts, Michael, and Mark Roberts. Fairweather Eden: Life in Britain Half a Million Years Ago 
as Revealed by the Excavations at Boxgrove. London: Century, 1998.
Pool, Robert. Beyond Engineering: How Society Shapes Technology. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1997.
Potts, Richard, and Pat Shipman. “Cutmarks Made by Stone Tools on Bones from Oldu-
vai Gorge, Tanzania.” Nature 291 (1981): 577–580.
Povinelli, Daniel J. Folk Physics for Apes: The Chimpanzee’s Theory of How the World Works. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000. 
Putnam, Hilary. Representation and Reality. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1988.

238         bibliography
Raichle, Marcus E., Julie A. Fiez, Tom O. Videen, Ann-Mary K. MacLeod, Jose V. Pardo, 
Peter T. Fox, and Steven E. Petersen. “Practice-related Changes in Human Brain 
Functional Anatomy During Nonmotor Learning.” Cerebral Cortex 4 (1994): 8–26.
Rappaport, Roy A. Ritual and Religion in the Making of Humanity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1999.
Raynal, Jean-Paul, Fatima-Zohra Sbihi Alaoui, Denis Geraads, Lionel Magoga, and 
Abderrahim Mohib. “The Earliest Occupation of North-Africa: The Moroccan Per-
spective.” Quaternary International 75 (2001): 65–75.
Renfrew, Colin. “Cognitive Archaeology.” In Archaeology: The Key Concepts, edited by 
Colin Renfrew and Paul Bahn, 41–45. Abingdon: Routledge, 2005.
——. Towards an Archaeology of Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982.
——. “What Is Cognitive Archaeology?” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 3 (1993): 247–270.
Renfrew, Colin, and Chris Scarre, eds. Cognition and Material Culture: The Archaeology of 
Symbolic Storage. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, 1998.
Richards, Michael P., Paul B. Pettitt, Mary C. Stiner, and Erik Trinkaus. “Stable Isotope 
Evidence for Increasing Dietary Breadth in the European Mid-Upper Paleolithic.” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 98 (2001): 6528–6532.
Rightmire, G. Philip. “Human Evolution in the Middle Pleistocene: The Role of Homo 
heidelbergensis.” Evolutionary Anthropology 6 (1998): 218–227.
——. “Homo in the Middle Pleistocene: Hypodigms, Variation, and Species Recognition.” 
Evolutionary Anthropology 17 (2008): 8–21.
Roberts, Alice. The Incredible Human Journey: The Story of How We Colonised the Planet. 
London: Bloomsbury, 2009.
Roche, H., A. Delagnes, J.-P. Brugal, C. Feibel, M. Kibunija, V. Mourre, and P.-J. Tixier. 
“Early Hominid Stone Tool Production and Technical Skill 2.34 Myr Ago in West 
Turkana, Kenya.” Nature 399 (1999): 57–60.
Rodman, Peter S., and Henry M. McHenry. “Bioenergetics and the Origin of Hominid 
Bipedalism.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 52 (1980): 103–106.
Roe, Derek. “British Lower and Middle Palaeolithic Handaxe Groups.” Proceedings of the 
Prehistoric Society 34 (1968): 245–267.
Rogachev, A. N. “Mnogosloinye Stoyanki Kostenkovsko-Borshevskogo raiona na Donu 
i Problema Razvitiya Kul’tury v Epokhy Verkhnego Paleolita na Russkoi Ravnine.” 
Materialy i Issledovaniya po Arkheologii SSSR 59 (1957): 9–134.
Rogachev, A. N., N. D. Praslov, M. V. Anikovich, V. I. Belyaeva, and T. N. Dmitrieva. 
“Kostenki 1 (Stoyanka Polyakova).” In Paleolit Kostenkovsko-Borshchevskogo Raiona na 
Donu, 1879–1979, edited by N. D. Praslov and A. N. Rogachev, 42–66. Leningrad: 
Nauka, 1982.
Rogachev, A. N., and A. A. Sinitsyn. “Kostenki 15 (Gorodtsovskaya Stoyanka).” In Paleolit 
Kostenkovsko-Borshchevskogo Raiona na Donu, 1879–1979, edited by N. D. Praslov and 
A. N. Rogachev, 162–171. Leningrad: Nauka, 1982.
Rolland, Nicholas. “Levallois Technique Emergence: Single or Multiple? A Review of 
the Euro-African Record.” In The Definition and Interpretation of Levallois Technology, 
edited by Harold L Dibble and Ofer Bar-Yosef, 333–359. Madison, Wis.: Prehistory 
Press, 1995.
Roux, Georges. Ancient Iraq. 3rd ed. London: Penguin, 1992.

bibliography        239
Rowe, James B., Ivan Toni, Oliver Josephs, Richard S. J. Frackowiak, and Richard E. Pass-
ingham. “The Prefrontal Cortex: Response Selection or Maintenance Within Work-
ing Memory?” Science 288 (2000): 1656–1560.
Russon, Anne E., and David R. Begun. “Evolutionary Origins of Great Ape Intelligence: 
An Integrated View.” In The Evolution of Thought: Evolutionary Origins of Great Ape 
Intelligence, edited by Anne E. Russon and David R. Begun, 353–368. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
Ryle, Gilbert. The Concept of Mind. New York: Barnes & Noble, 1949.
Sablin, Mikhail V., and Gennady A. Khlopachev. “The Earliest Ice Age Dogs: Evidence 
from Eliseevichi I.” Current Anthropology 43 (2002): 795–799.
Sackett, James R. “The Neuvic Group: Upper Paleolithic Open-Air Sites in the Perigord.” 
In Upper Pleistocene Prehistory of Western Eurasia, edited by Harold L. Dibble and Anna 
Montet-White, 61–84. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Museum, 1988.
Santonja, Manuel, and Paola Villa. “The Acheulean of Western Europe.” In Axe Age: 
Acheulian Tool-making from Quarry to Discard, edited by Naama Goren-Inbar and 
Gonen Sharon, 429–478. London: Equinox, 2006.
Savolainen, Peter, Ya-ping Zhang, Jing Luo, Joakim Lundeberg, and Thomas Leitner. 
“Genetic Evidence for an East Asian Origin of Domestic Dogs.” Science 298 (2002): 
1610–1613.
Schick, Kathy, and Nicholas Toth. Making Silent Stones Speak: Human Evolution and the 
Dawn of Technology. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1993.
——. “An Overview of the Oldowan Industrial Complex: The Sites and the Nature of 
Their Evidence.” In The Oldowan: Case Studies into the Earliest Stone Age, edited by 
Nicholas Toth and Kathy Schick. Gosport, Ind.: Stone Age Institute Press, 2006.
Schlanger, Nathan. “The Chaîne Opératoire.” In Archaeology: The Key Concepts, edited by 
Colin Renfrew and Paul Bahn, 25–31. Abingdon: Routledge, 2005.
——. “Understanding Levallois: Lithic Technology and Cognitive Archaeology.” Cambridge 
Archaeological Journal 6 (1996): 231–254.
Scott, Gary R., and Luis Gilbert. “The Oldest Hand-Axes in Europe.” Nature 461 (2009): 
82–85.
Scott, Katherine. “Two Hunting Episodes of Middle Palaeolithic Age at La Cotte de 
Saint-Brelade, Jersey (Channel Islands).” World Archaeology 12 (1980): 137–152.
Searle, John R. The Mind: A Brief Introduction. New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Seeley, Thomas D. Honeybee Democracy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2010.
Semaw, Sileshi. “The Oldest Stone Artifacts from Gona (2.6–2.5 Ma), Afar, Ethiopia: 
Implications for Understanding the Earliest Stages of Stone Knapping.” In The Old-
owan: Case Studies into the Earliest Stone Age, edited by Nicholas Toth and Kathy Schick, 
43–75. Gosport, Ind.: Stone Age Institute Press, 2006.
Shaw, George Bernard. Back to Methuseleh: A Metabiological Pentateuch. New York: Bren-
tano, 1921.
——. “Maxims for Revolutionists.” In Man and Superman. New York: Brentano, 1905.
Shea, John J. “Middle Paleolithic Spear Point Technology.” In Projectile Technology, edited 
by Heidi Knecht, 79–106. New York: Plenum Press, 1997.
——. “Neandertals, Competition, and the Origin of Modern Human Behavior in the 
Levant.” Evolutionary Anthropology 12 (2003): 173–187.

240         bibliography
Shelley, Mary. Frankenstein. New York: Random House, 1993.
Sherwood, Chet S., James K. Rilling, Ralph L. Holloway, and Patrick R. Hof. “Evolution 
of the Brain in Humans—Comparative Perspective.” In Encyclopedia of Neuroscience, 
edited by Mark D. Binder, Nobutaka Hirokawa, and Uwe Windhorst, 1334–1338. 
New York: Springer, 2009.
Shlain, Leonard. Art and Physics: Parallel Visions in Space, Time, and Light. New York: Mor-
row, 1991.
Shovkoplyas, I. G. “Dobranichevskaya Stoyanka na Kievshchine.” Materialy i Issledovaniya 
po Arkheologii SSSR 185 (1972): 177–188.
Simpson, George Gaylord. The Major Features of Evolution. New York: Simon and Schus-
ter, 1953.
Sinitsyn, Andrei A. “Nizhnie Kul’turnye Sloi Kostenok 14 (Markina Gora) (Raskopki 
1998–2001 gg.).” In Kostenki v Kontekste Paleolita Evrazii, edited by Andrei A. Sinitsyn, 
V. Ya. Sergin, and John F. Hoffecker, 219–236. St. Petersburg: Russian Academy of 
Sciences, 2002.
Smail, Daniel Lord. On Deep History and the Brain. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 2008.
Soffer, O., J. M. Adovasio, J. S. Illingsworth, H. A. Amirkhanov, N. D. Praslov, and  
M. Street. “Palaeolithic Perishables Made Permanent.” Antiquity 74 (2000): 812–821.
Solecki, Ralph S. Shanidar, the First Flower People. New York: Knopf, 1971.
Sollas, William J. Ancient Hunters and Their Modern Representatives. London: Macmillan, 
1911.
Sommer, Jeffrey D. “The Shanidar IV ‘Flower Burial’: A Re-evaluation of Neanderthal 
Burial Ritual.” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 9 (1999): 127–129.
Spencer, Herbert. The Principles of Psychology. 3rd ed. New York: Appleton, 1881.
Stone, Valerie E. “Footloose and Fossil-Free No More: Evolutionary Psychology Needs 
Archaeology.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 25 (2002): 420–421.
Stout, Dietrich, and Thierry Chaminde. “The Evolutionary Neuroscience of Tool Mak-
ing.” Neuropsychologia 45 (2007): 1091–1100.
Stout, Dietrich, Nicholas Toth, Kathy Schick, Julie Stout, and Gary Hutchins. “Stone 
Tool-Making and Brain Activation: Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Studies.” 
Journal of Archaeological Science 27 (2000): 1215–1223.
Straus, Lawrence G. “The Upper Paleolithic of Europe: An Overview.” Evolutionary 
Anthropology 4 (1995): 4–16.
Striedter, Georg F. Principles of Brain Evolution. Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer, 2005.
Stringer, Chris, and Peter Andrews. The Complete World of Human Evolution. New York: 
Thames and Hudson, 2005.
Stutz, Aaron Jonas, Natalie D. Munro, and Guy Bar-Oz. “Increasing the Resolution of 
the Broad Spectrum Revolution in the Southern Levantine Epipaleolithic (19–12 
ka).” Journal of Human Evolution 56 (2009): 294–306.
Suddendorf, Thomas, Donna Rose Addis, and Michael C. Corballis. “Mental Time 
Travel and the Shaping of the Human Mind.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B 364 (2009): 1317–1324.
Susman, Randall L. “Hand of Paranthropus robustus from Member 1, Swartkrans: Fossil 
Evidence for Tool Behavior.” Science 240 (1988): 781–784.

bibliography        241
Susman, Randall L., Jack T. Stern, and William L. Jungers. “Locomotor Adaptations in 
the Hadar Hominids.” In Ancestors: The Hard Evidence, edited by Eric Delson, 184–
192. New York: Liss, 1985.
Svoboda, Jir ˇí, Vojen Lozˇek, and Emanuel V lc ˇek. Hunters Between East and West: The Paleo-
lithic of Moravia. New York: Plenum Press, 1996.
Swanson, Larry W. Brain Architecture: Understanding the Basic Plan. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2003.
Tattersall, Ian. The Fossil Trail: How We Know What We Think We Know About Human Evo-
lution. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995.
——. “Human Origins: Out of Africa.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 
(2009): 16018–16021.
Temple, Robert. The Genius of China: 3,000 Years of Science, Discovery, and Invention. New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1986.
Thomas, Lewis. The Lives of a Cell: Notes of a Biology Watcher. New York: Viking Press, 1974.
Tobias, Philip V. The Brain in Hominid Evolution. New York: Columbia University Press, 
1971.
Toth, Nicholas. “The Oldowan Reassessed: A Close Look at Early Stone Artifacts.” Jour-
nal of Archaeological Science 12 (1985): 101–120.
Toth, Nicholas, Kathy Schick, E. Sue Savage-Rumbaugh, Rose A. Sevick, and Duane M. 
Rumbaugh. “Pan the Toolmaker: Investigations into the Stone Tool-Making and Tool-
Using Capabilities of a Bonobo (Pan paniscus).” Journal of Archaeological Science 20 
(1993): 81–91.
Toth, Nicholas, Kathy Schick, and Sileshi Semaw. “A Comparative Study of the Stone 
Tool-Making Skills of Pan, Australopithecus, and Homo sapiens.” In The Oldowan: Case 
Studies into the Earliest Stone Age, edited by Nicholas Toth and Kathy Schick, 155–222. 
Gosport, Ind.: Stone Age Institute Press, 2006.
Toynbee, Arnold. The Industrial Revolution. Boston: Beacon Press, 1956.
Trigger, Bruce G. “Childe’s Relevance to the 1990s.” In The Archaeology of V. Gordon 
Childe, edited by David R. Harris, 9–34. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.
——. Gordon Childe: Revolutions in Archaeology. New York: Columbia University Press, 1980.
——. A History of Archaeological Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Trinkaus, Erik. “Neanderthal Limb Proportions and Cold Adaptation.” In Aspects of 
Human Evolution, edited by Chris Stringer, 187–224. London: Taylor & Francis, 
1981.
Tuchman, Barbara W. A Distant Mirror: The Calamitous 14th Century. New York: Knopf, 
1978.
Turing, Alan. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” Mind 59 (1950): 433–460.
Tuttle, Russell H. Apes of the World: Their Social Behavior, Communication, Mentality and 
Ecology. Park Ridge, N.J.: Noyes, 1986.
Valde-Nowak, Pawel, Adam Nadachowski, and Mieczyslaw Wolsan. “Upper Palaeoli-
thic Boomerang Made of a Mammoth Tusk in South Poland.” Nature 329 (1987): 
436–438.
Vandiver, Pamela P., Olga Soffer, Bohuslav Klima, and Jir ˇí Svoboda. “The Origins of 
Ceramic Technology at Dolni Veˇstonice, Czechoslovakia.” Science 246 (1989): 
1002–1008.

242         bibliography
Vanhaeran, Marian, and Francesco d’Errico. “Aurignacian Ethno-linguistic Geography of 
Europe Revealed by Personal Ornaments.” Journal of Archaeological Science 33 (2006): 
1105–1128.
Vanhaeran, Marian, Francesco d’Errico, Chris Stringer, Sarah L. James, Jonathan A. 
Todd, and Henk K. Mienis. “Middle Paleolithic Shell Beads in Israel and Algeria.” 
Science 312 (2006): 1785–1788.
Van Peer, Philip. The Levallois Reduction Strategy. Madison, Wis.: Prehistory Press, 1992.
Veblen, Thorstein. The Instinct of Workmanship and the State of the Industrial Arts. New 
York: Macmillan, 1914.
Villa, Paola. “Middle Pleistocene Prehistory in Southwestern Europe: The State of Our 
Knowledge and Ignorance.” Journal of Anthropological Research 47 (1991): 193–217.
Villa, Paola, François Bon, and Jean-Christophe Castel. “Fuel, Fire and Fireplaces in the 
Palaeolithic of Western Europe.” Review of Archaeology 23 (2002): 33–42.
Villa, Paola, S. Soriano, Nicolas Teyssandier, and S. Wurz. “The Howiesons Poort and 
MSA III at Klasies River Main Site, Cave 1A.” Journal of Archaeological Science 37 
(2010): 630–655.
Wadley, Lyn. “Revisiting Cultural Modernity and the Role of Red Ochre in the Middle 
Stone Age.” In The Prehistory of Africa: Tracing the Lineage of Modern Man, edited by 
Himla Soodyall, 49–63. Johannesburg: Jonathan Ball, 2006.
——. “What Is Cultural Modernity? A General View and a South African Perspective from 
Rose Cottage Cave.” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 1 (2001): 201–221.
Walker, Alan, and Richard E. Leakey. “The Postcranial Bones.” In The Nariokotome 
Homo erectus Skeleton, edited by Alan Walker and Richard E. Leakey, 95–160. Berlin: 
Springer, 1993.
Walker, Alan, and Pat Shipman. The Ape in the Tree: An Intellectual and Natural History of 
Proconsul. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2005.
——. The Wisdom of the Bones: In Search of Human Origins. New York: Knopf, 1996.
Watts, Ian. “The Origin of Symbolic Culture.” In The Evolution of Culture: An Interdisci-
plinary View, edited by Robin Dunbar, Chris Knight, and Camilla Power, 113–146. 
New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1999.
Weaver, Timothy D. “The Meaning of Neandertal Skeletal Morphology.” Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 106 (2009): 16028–16033.
Wells, Spencer. Deep Ancestry: Inside the Genographic Project. Washington, D.C.: National 
Geographic Society, 2007.
Westermarck, T., and E. Antila. “Diet in Relation to the Nervous System.” In Human 
Nutrition and Dietetics, 10th ed., edited by J. S. Garrow, W. P. T. James, and A. Ralph, 
715–730. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 2000.
Wheeler, William Morton. “The Ant-Colony as an Organism.” Journal of Morphology 22 
(1911): 307–325.
White, Lynn. Medieval Religion and Technology: Collected Essays. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1978.
——. Medieval Technology and Social Change. London: Oxford University Press, 1962.
White, Mark, and Nick Ashton. “Lower Palaeolithic Core Technology and the Origins 
of the Levallois Method in North-Western Europe.” Current Anthropology 44 (2003): 
598–609.

bibliography        243
White, Tim D., Berhane Asfaw, Yonas Beyene, Yohannes Haile-Selassie, C. Owen Love-
joy, Gen Suwa, and Giday WoldeGabriel. “Ardipithecus ramidus and the Paleobiology 
of Early Hominids.” Science 326 (2009): 75–86.
White, Tim D., Gen Suwa, and Berhane Asfaw. “Australopithecus ramidus, a New Species 
of Early Hominid from Aramis, Ethiopia.” Nature 371 (1994): 306–312.
Willoughby, Pamela R. The Evolution of Modern Humans in Africa: A Comprehensive Guide. 
Lanham, Md.: AltaMira Press, 2007.
Wilson, Andrew I. “Machines in Greek and Roman Technology.” In The Oxford Hand-
book of Engineering and Technology in the Classical World, edited by John Peter Oleson, 
336–366. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Wilson, Edward O. The Insect Societies. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1971.
Wilson, Frank R. The Hand: How Its Use Shapes the Brain, Language, and Human Culture. 
New York: Pantheon Books, 1998.
Wood, Bernard. Human Evolution: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2005.
Wulliman, Mario F. “Brain Phenotypes and Early Regulatory Genes: The Bauplan of the 
Metazoan Central Nervous System.” In Brain Evolution and Cognition, edited by Ger-
hard Roth and Mario F. Wulliman, 11–40. New York: Wiley, 2001.
Wymer, John. Lower Palaeolithic Archaeology in Britain as Represented by the Thames Valley. 
London: Baker, 1968.
Wynn, Thomas. “Archaeology and Cognitive Evolution.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 25 
(2002): 389–438.
——. “The Evolution of Tools and Symbolic Behavior.” In Handbook of Human Symbolic 
Evolution, edited by Andrew Lock and Charles R. Peters, 269–271. Oxford: Blackwell, 
1999.
——. “Handaxe Enigmas.” World Archaeology 27 (1995): 10–24.
——. “Piaget, Stone Tools and the Evolution of Human Intelligence.” World Archaeology 17 
(1985): 32–43.
——. “Tools, Grammar and the Archaeology of Cognition.” Cambridge Archaeological Jour-
nal 1 (1991): 191–206.
Wynn, Thomas, and Frederick L. Coolidge. “Implications of a Strict Standard for Rec-
ognizing Modern Cognition in Prehistory.” In Cognitive Archaeology and Human Evo-
lution, edited by Sophie A. de Beaune, Frederick L. Coolidge, and Thomas Wynn, 
117–127. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Wynn, Thomas, and Forrest Tierson. “Regional Comparison of the Shapes of Later 
Acheulean Handaxes.” American Anthropologist 92 (1990): 73–84.
Zebrowski, Ernest. A History of the Circle: Mathematical Reasoning and the Physical Universe. 
New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1999.
Zhu, R. X., R. Potts, Y. X. Pan, H. T. Yao, L. Q. Lü, X. Zhao, X. Gao, L. W. Chen, F. Gao, 
and C. L. Deng. “Early Evidence of the Genus Homo in East Asia.” Journal of Human 
Evolution 55 (2008): 1075–1085.


index
Abri Labuttat (France), 133. See also artifi-
cial memory systems
Abu Hureyra (Syria), 144–145. See also 
agriculture 
Acheulean industry (Lower Paleolithic), 
53–54, 57–61, 66, 68–72, 87, 191n.79; 
as “culture,” 65; late, 66, 70–72. 
See also biface; Homo ergaster; Homo 
heidelbergensis
Adams, Robert McC., 142. See also 
Sumer
Agricola (Georg Bauer), 165
agriculture, 128–129, 143–146, 160–161; 
“agricultural revolution,” in Europe, 
161; crop rotation in, 161; origin of, 
and Upper Paleolithic technological 
innovation, 128–129, 143–144. See 
also domestication; Fertile Crescent; 
Neolithic Revolution; village
‘Ain Ghazal (Jordan), 145–146, 148 
Ain Mallaha (Israel), 144–145. See also 
Natufian culture
Akkadian state, 156
Alexander the Great, 157. See also Greece, 
ancient
Algaze, Guillermo, 214n.27. See also 
nation-state or civilization; Sumer
alternative reality, 35, 74, 174; archaeol-
ogy of, 100–103. See also creativity; 
humans, modern; mind, human; 
modernity
Ambrose, Stanley, 78, 92. See also Mount 
Toba; tools and weapons, composite
amphibians, 38
Amphioxus, 37
analogical, 36. See also digital; representa-
tions, mental; symbols; visual art
analytical engine, 176
Ancient Hunters and Their Modern Represen-
tatives (Sollas), 166
Andean civilization, 153
Annelida, 36
Antikythera Mechanism, 176, 216n.58. See 
also Greece, ancient
ants, 17–19, 142; genus Atta, 169–170. See 
also eusociality; honeybee; super-brain, 

246         index
ants (continued)
modern human; super-organism; 
Wheeler, William Morton; Wilson, 
Edward O.
apes, 39, 41–43, 170; cognitive abilities of, 
189n.43; evolution of, 39–43; relation 
of, to humans, 42–43. See also chim-
panzee; Darwin, Charles; Dryopithecus; 
gorilla; knuckle walking; Linnaeus, 
Carolus; orangutan; Proconsul
archaeology, x, 27; cognitive, 27–28, 65, 
95–96; culture concept of, 104; history 
of, 27–28, 104–109; in Soviet Union, 
105, 117–118; systems ecology perspec-
tive of, 27. See also Bordes, François; 
Childe, V. Gordon; Leroi-Gourhan, 
André; Renfrew, Colin
Archimedes, 20, 157. See also Greece, 
ancient
Ardipithecus ramidus, 47, 50, 188n.40, 
189n.52. See also bipedalism; hand, 
human
army, 148, 156–157, 164; marching forma-
tions of, 164
art. See visual art
artificial intelligence (AI), 177–178, 
182n.43; consequences of, 178; 
“strong,” 177, 182n.43. See also creativ-
ity; Kurzweil, Ray; mind, human; 
Turing, Alan 
artificial memory systems, 11, 100, 132–
134; quipu as, 153. See also technology: 
information 
artificial selection, 13
Assmann, Jan, 155, 212n.11, 215nn.50–
53. See also Egypt, ancient
Aurignacian industry, 118. See also Upper 
Paleolithic: early
Austen, Jane, 20
Australians, 166, 218n.91, 219n.95; 
Aranda (Arunta), 219n.96; as “living 
fossils,” 166
australopithecines, 47 
Australopithecus afarensis, 45, 47, 50. See 
also bipedalism; hand, human
Australopithecus anamensis, 47. See also 
bipedalism
Australopithecus garhi, 54. See also Oldowan 
industry
Avdeevo (Russia), 123. See also Gravettian 
industry
axon, 36–37. See also brain; neurons 
Babbage, Charles, 176
Babylonian Empire, 156
Bacon, Francis, 165–166, 175
baking oven, 144, 213n.18. See also 
Ohalo II
Bantu-speaking peoples, 157. See also iron 
technology
Barbegal (France), 218n.74. See also 
Roman Empire: water wheels in
Bar-Yosef, Ofer, 144–145, 207n.42. See 
also Natufian culture
basket, 126
Benz, Ernst, 161
Berekhat Ram (Golan Heights), 97–98 
Bickerton, Derek, 36, 199n.50. See also 
language, syntactic; representations, 
mental; symbols
biface (bifacial stone artifact, hand ax; 
Lower Paleolithic), 2, 4–5, 8, 24, 
33–34, 52–62, 66, 72; of bone, 186n.3; 
earliest dated, 33, 53, 57–58, 179n.4; 
functions of, 53, 60–63; intentionality 
and, 66–67; microscopic wear patterns 
on, 53, 60–61, 64, 191n.81; from North 
Africa, 194n.118; origin of, 52–60; 
sameness of, in space and time, 64, 
67; as social-binding agent, 64; spread 
of, out of Africa, 70–71, 191n.81, 
194n.122; types and variants of, 58, 
67–69; unused or lightly used, 62. See 
also Acheulean industry; Isaac, Glynn 
Ll.; Leakey, Mary; mental template; 
representations, mental: artificial
Bilzingsleben (Germany), 97
Binford, Lewis, 94
biogeographic “rules” of climate adapta-
tion, 115. See also humans, modern: 

index        247
anatomy of; Neanderthals: cold 
adaptation by
bipedalism, 2, 15, 30, 43–44; anatomi-
cal changes related to, 45–46; energy 
efficiency of, 44; origin of, 44–47; 
recognition of, in fossil record, 45–47; 
relation of, to evolution of hand, 43, 
54 
Blombos Cave (South Africa), 76, 100. 
See also Middle Stone Age, in Africa; 
modernity
Boden, Margaret, 8. See also creativity
Bodo (Ethiopia), 81
Boëda, Eric, 89–90. See also Levallois 
prepared-core technology
Bone Cave (Tasmania), 207n.41
Bonn-Oberkassel (Germany), 132. See also 
domestication: of Upper Paleolithic 
dog
bonobo. See chimpanzee: pygmy
Bordes, François, 67, 94. See also Neander-
thals: “cultures” or “tribes” of
bow and arrow, 168; Upper Paleolithic, 
129. See also Stellmoor
Boxgrove (England), 71, 191n.81. See 
also Acheulean industry; biface: 
microscopic wear patterns on; Homo 
heidelbergensis
brain, 14–16; cerebellum, 37–38, 198n.36; 
energy requirements of, 196n.18; evo-
lution of, 14–15, 37–38, 187n.8; fore-
brain, 37; function of, 35; hindbrain, 
37; of invertebrates, 187n.12; midbrain 
(mesencephalon), 37; prefrontal 
cortex, 84–85, 170; symbols in, 15; 
telencephalon, 37; temporal lobe, 85; 
volume (cranial capacity) of, 34–35, 
41, 65, 80–81. See also mind, human; 
super-brain, modern human 
brain-imaging technology, 26–27, 32, 96; 
modular model of mind and, 32. See 
also computed tomography; mag-
netic resonance imaging, functional; 
positron-emission tomography
Braudel, Fernand, 164
Broken Hill (Zambia). See Kabwe
bubonic plague, 115, 163; “Black Death” 
as, 163
Bunge, Mario, 182n.47. See also Chomsky, 
Noam; mind, human
burial, 121, 127; grave offerings and, 121, 
127; ritual, 127. See also death, denial 
of
Butler, Samuel, 23. See also Darwin, 
Charles
Byron, Lord, 175. See also Shelley, Mary
calendar, 133, 152; in ancient Egypt, 152; 
lunar, 133, 181n.32; in Sumer, 152. 
See also artificial memory systems; 
Marshack, Alexander
Calvin, William, 61. See also biface; lan-
guage, syntactic
Cambrian period, 37
Campanian Ignimbrite volcanic eruption, 
116–118. See also Kostenki–Borshchevo 
sites; Upper Paleolithic: early
Carpenter’s Gap (Australia), 113. See also 
humans, modern: colonization of 
Australia by
catarrhines, 39–40, 48, 50. See also pri-
mates; vision: color 
cave paintings (Upper Paleolithic), 1, 101, 
179n.3. See also Chauvet Cave; visual 
art
ceramic technology, 123, 125–126, 
131–132. See also Dolní Veˇstonice; pot-
tery; Sumer; Yuchanyan Cave
chaîne opératoire, 28. See also Leroi-
Gourhan, André
“Chatelperronian” industry, 203n.90. See 
also Neanderthals; ornaments
Chauvet Cave (France), 120. See also cave 
paintings; visual art
Childe, V. Gordon, x, 27, 104–108, 111, 
121–122, 127, 140, 172, 204n.10, 
205n.23; on creativity, 107, 122; 
cultural evolutionism and, 106; on 
Industrial Revolution, 105, 204n.4; 
Marxism and, 105–106, 117, 204n.8, 

248         index
Childe, V. Gordon (continued)
205n.16; on mechanical technology in 
Upper Paleolithic, 129, 210n.87; “Neo-
lithic Revolution” of, 105, 140, 204n.4; 
on pace of innovation, 122, 127; per-
sonality of, 105, 204n.8; Soviet Union 
and, 105, 205n.15; “Urban Revolution” 
of, 105, 140, 204n.4, 212n.10. See also 
archaeology: history of; Collingwood, 
R. G.; creativity; history
chimpanzee, 23, 42–43, 87, 189n.43; 
neocortex in, 39; pygmy (bonobo), 54, 
58. See also apes
China: ancient civilization of, 141, 152, 
158–160; Eastern Zhou period of, 158; 
industrial era in, 158–159; Legalism 
in, 158; mechanical clock of Su Sung, 
159, 217n.65; Ming dynasty of, 141, 
159–161; monumental architecture of, 
158, 214n.40; origin of, 152, 216n.61; 
Qin dynasty of, 158, 217n.66; Qing 
(Manchu) dynasty of, 160; Shang 
dynasty of, 158, 214n.40; technology 
in, 158–160, 216nn.61,65; Warring 
States period of, 158; Xia dynasty of, 
152. See also compass, magnetic; Egypt, 
ancient; Maya; Roman Empire; Sumer
Chomsky, Noam, x, 6, 67, 74, 76, 
180nn.20–21, 182n.47, 198nn.41–42. 
See also discrete infinity; language, 
syntactic; mind, human; Minimalist 
Program; representations, mental
Chordata, 37, 170
city-state, 152, 157; in Greece, 157; in 
Mesopotamia, 152. See also Greece, 
ancient; nation-state or civilization
Clark, J. Desmond, 193n.113. See also 
biface; Middle Stone Age, in Africa
clock, mechanical, 12–13, 159, 162–163, 
176, 181n.33; escapement mechanism 
of, 12, 162, 176; of Su Sung (water-
powered), 159, 217n.65; weight-driven, 
12, 126, 162; worldview and, 12–13, 
162, 176, 181n.34. See also Mumford, 
Lewis
clothing, tailored, 100–101, 126. See also 
needle, eyed
Cnidaria, 36–37. See also brain: evolution of
“cognitive revolution,” 14 
Collingwood, R. G., x–xi, 106–108, 154, 
172, 204n.10; historical thinking of, 
154. See also Childe, V. Gordon; his-
tory; mind, human
Combe-Saunière I (France), 129, 130. 
See also spear-thrower; technology: 
mechanical
compass, magnetic, 159, 164. See also 
China: technology in
computed tomography (CT), 27. See also 
brain-imaging technology
computer, programmable digital, 176
cone photoreceptors, 40. See also vision
conjunctive technology. See tools and 
weapons, composite
connectionism, 16
consciousness, 21, 77, 193n.102; higher-
order, 21, 77, 183n.62; mechanical, 
177; primary, 21. See also artificial intel-
ligence; Edelman, Gerald; language, 
syntactic
Coolidge, Frederick, 96. See also working 
memory; Wynn, Thomas
Copernicus, Nicolaus, 218n.87
Corballis, Michael, 7, 40, 74. See also 
creativity; mind, human
cranial capacity, human. See brain: volume 
of
creativity, x, 5, 10–11, 15–16, 19, 32, 67, 
74–75, 79, 85, 171, 182n.43; archaeo-
logical evidence for, 77; definition of, 
8, 107; prefrontal cortex and, 84–85, 
92; suppression of, 122, 127–128, 
142–143, 159–160. See also artificial 
intelligence; Boden, Margaret; Childe, 
V. Gordon; Chomsky, Noam; moder-
nity; music; super-brain, modern 
human; technology; visual art
Cretaceous period, 39
Croce, Benedetto, x, 172. See also Colling-
wood, R. G.; history

index        249
Darwin, Charles, 8, 13–14, 19, 23, 42, 
106, 172, 178, 182n.41. See also natural 
selection
Darwin, Erasmus, 175
Davidson, Iain, 192n.100, 200n.64, 
202n.85. See also archaeology: 
cognitive
Dawkins, Richard, 15
Dawn of European Civilization, The 
(Childe), 104. See also archaeology: 
culture concept of
Deacon, Terrence W., 198n.42. See also 
language, syntactic
death, denial of, 121. See also 
intentionality
Decline of the West, The (Spengler), 106. See 
also history
Deetz, James, 31, 97, 186n.1, 199n.48. See 
also language, syntactic: artifacts and; 
mental template
dendrites, 36. See also brain; neurons
Descartes, René, 13, 165, 172. See also 
mind–body dualism
Dessauer, Frederick, 22. See also technol-
ogy: philosophy of
digital, 36, 87. See also analogical; 
language, syntactic; representations, 
mental; symbols
digging implements, 101, 118, 149
discrete infinity, 6, 74, 182n.43. See also 
Chomsky, Noam; creativity; language, 
syntactic
Dmanisi (Georgia), 62. See also Oldowan 
industry
DNA: ancient, 32, 195n.14; mitochon-
drial, 132; of Neanderthals, 195n.14
Dobranichevka (Ukraine), 133, 135. See 
also dwelling: of mammoth bones
dog. See domestication: of Upper Paleo-
lithic dog
Dolní Veˇstonice (Czech Republic), 123, 
127. See also Gravettian industry
domestication, 129, 132, 145; of donkey, 
149–150; of horse, 156–157; of ox, 
149; of plants, 145; of Upper Paleo-
lithic dog, 129, 132, 210n.96. See also 
agriculture
Donald, Merlin, 16, 27, 185n.79. See also 
symbols: storage of
Dorset, Late (arctic culture), 168
drill, rotary, 101, 118. See also Kostenki–
Borshchevo sites; Upper Paleolithic: 
early
Dryopithecus, 41, 45, 50, 188n.37. See also 
apes; hand, human: evolution of
dualism. See mind–body dualism
Dunbar, Robin, 20, 83. See also language, 
syntactic; “social brain hypothesis” 
dwelling (house), 120, 133, 135–137, 
145; of mammoth bones (late Upper 
Paleolithic), 133, 135; paved floor 
in (late Upper Paleolithic), 135–136; 
rectilinear, 145. See also ‘Ain Ghazal; 
Dobranichevka; Kostenki–Borshchevo 
sites; Mezhirich; Yudinovo
E. coli (bacterium), 35. See also brain: 
evolution of 
Edelman, Gerald, 21. See also brain; con-
sciousness; language, syntactic; mind, 
human
Egypt, ancient, 151–152, 154–156; 
Akhenaten, 154; calendar in, 152; 
Cheops, 151; Djoser’s step pyramid 
in, 155; Fourth Dynasty of, 151; Great 
Pyramid in, 151, 153; longevity of, 155; 
Middle Kingdom “police state” in, 156, 
215n.53; nation-state imposed on clans 
and villages in, 155–156; nomes in, 156, 
215n.52; Old Kingdom of, 151, 154, 
156, 158; sed festival in, 155, 215n.50; 
Sixth Dynasty of, 156; technology in, 
215n.49; Third Dynasty of, 155; tombs 
as art in, 212n.11; Twelfth Dynasty of, 
156; unification of Lower and Upper, 
152; writing in, 155, 215n.51. See also 
Assmann, Jan; China; creativity: sup-
pression of; Kemp, Barry J.; Sumer
Eliseevichi I (Russia), 132. See also domes-
tication: of Upper Paleolithic dog

250         index
El Niño, 115
embodied cognition, 184n.65. See also 
Heidegger, Martin 
emergent materialism, 182n.47. See also 
mind, human
Emmorey, Karen, 96. See also language, 
syntactic: sign language as; positron-
emission tomography
Engels, Frederick, 105
Enlightenment, 106
Eocene epoch, 39, 50
escapement mechanism. See clock, 
mechanical: escapement mechanism of
eukaryotes, 36
EUP. See Upper Paleolithic: early
Europe, medieval, 142, 162
eusociality (true sociality), 17, 169, 
183n.57, 196n.28; evolution of (“pro-
gressive provisioning” hypothesis), 
196n.28; in insects, 17, 19, 169–170; 
in mammals, 170, 183n.57, 219n.3; 
reproductive biology of, 170–171. See 
also ants; honeybee; mole rat, African; 
super-brain, modern human; super-
organism; Wheeler, William Morton; 
Wilson, Edward O.
evolution, convergent, 170
evolutionary psychologists, 14. See also 
mind, human: computational theory 
of; Pinker, Steven
extinctions, 38–39 
eyeglasses, 163
femur, human, 45, 47
Fertile Crescent, 143–146. See also 
agriculture 
fishing, 93; gorge for, 119
foot, human, 45. See also bipedalism
foramen magnum, human, 45, 47. See also 
bipedalism
FOXP2 gene, 88. See also Neanderthals: 
genome of
Frankenstein (Shelley), 23, 175–178, 
220n.18
French Academy of Linguistics, 78
frontal bone, 70, 83
Galago demidovii, 39. See also brain: evolu-
tion of; primates
Galgenburg (Austria), “dancing lady” 
sculpture from, 120
Galileo Galilei, 6, 157, 165
Geissenklösterle (Germany), 110, 121, 
181n.29. See also music
generativity. See creativity
Gesher Benot Ya’aqov (Israel), 71
gibbons, 86. See also bipedalism; primates
Goldberg, Elkhonon, 183n.48, 186n.92. 
See also brain; creativity; prefrontal 
cortex
Gona (Ethiopia), 54
Goodall, Jane, 23. See also chimpanzee
gorilla, 42–43 
Gravettian industry, 121–128, 209n.64; 
art and, 127–128; burials and, 127; 
household items of, 126; as industrial 
revolution, 121; population growth 
and, 123; settlements and, 122–124; 
skeletal remains and, 128; as technol-
ogy, 123–126; “Venus” figurine and, 
121, 127–128; worldview of, 128. See 
also Kostenki–Borshchevo sites; Upper 
Paleolithic: middle
Greece, ancient, 142, 157–158; Alexan-
dria, 157; Hellenistic period of, 142, 
157, 216n.57; Ptolemaic dynasty of, 
157; technology in, 157–158, 216n.58. 
See also China; Egypt, ancient; Maya; 
Roman Empire; Sumer 
Greenfield, Patricia, 32. See also language, 
syntactic: artifacts and
Greenland ice core record, 115–117 
Greenland Interstadial 12, 116, 118. See 
also Greenland ice core record
Grundlinien einer Philosophie der Technik 
(Kapp), 22
guns, 164; cannons, earliest, 164; gunpow-
der, 164
Gutenberg, Johannes, 148. See also print-
ing; technology: information

index        251
Hadar (Ethiopia), 47, 50, 52, 191n.83. See 
also Australopithecus afarensis
hand, human, 2–3, 35, 43, 190n.56; apical 
tufts of, 50–51; of Australopithecus afaren-
sis, 50–51; evolution of, 47–52, 180n.7; 
glabrous skin of, 48; grips of, 49–52; 
of Homo ergaster, 52, 190n.76; of Homo 
habilis, 51–52, 190n.73; movements 
of, 48–50; opposition of finger and 
thumb, 48, 50; of Paranthropus robustus, 
51–52; ratio of thumb length to index 
finger length, 48, 50; as sensory organ 
(“sensory hand”), 48, 107, 165. See 
also bipedalism; Mountcastle, Vernon; 
Napier, John Russell; representations, 
mental: artificial; vocal tract, human
hand ax. See biface
“hard-hammer” flaking technique, 89
harpoon, 101
Hegel, G. W. F., 172–173, 178, 220n.14. 
See also history
Heidegger, Martin, 22, 25, 27. See also 
technology: philosophy of
Heinrich Event 4, 118
Hellenistic period. See Greece, ancient: 
Hellenistic period of
hemoglobin, 37
Herder, Johann, 172
Herto (Ethiopia), 81. See also humans, 
modern: anatomy of 
history, 106–107, 171–174; mind and, 
106, 172–174; “people without,” 
166–168, 219n.95; prehistory and, 
104–109; as progress, 172–174; 
theocratic, 154; Upper Paleolithic as, 
108–137. See also Childe, V. Gordon; 
Collingwood, R. G.; creativity; Hegel, 
G. W. F.; Kant, Immanuel; mind, 
human; Smail, Daniel Lord
Hitler, Adolf, 104
Hobbes, Thomas, 13, 17–20, 130, 172, 
176, 182n.37; on mechanical technol-
ogy as “artificiall life,” 17, 176. See also 
eusociality; Leviathan; super-brain, 
modern human; super-organism
Hohle Fels Cave (Germany), 10, 120–121, 
181n.29. See also music; visual art
Hohlenstein-Stadel (Germany), 101–102, 
120. See also Löwenmensch figurine 
Holloway, Ralph, 31. See also brain: evolu-
tion of 
Homo erectus, 52, 61, 100
Homo ergaster, 52–53, 61–62, 65 
Homo habilis, 57, 61–62, 190n.73 
Homo heidelbergensis, 53, 67, 70–71, 79–81, 
91
Homo neanderthalensis. See Neanderthals
Homo sapiens, 4, 70, 73, 79–80, 83. See 
also humans, modern 
honeybee (Apis sp.), x, 16–17, 70, 75, 
211n.105; externalized representations 
(“dance language”) of, 16, 19, 68, 87, 
179n.5. See also eusociality; representa-
tions, mental; super-brain, modern 
human; super-organism
humans, modern: anatomy of, x, 8, 
29, 93; brain volume of, 80–81, 84; 
colonization of Australia by, 100–101, 
112–113; dispersal of, out of Africa, 
16, 112–115, 167, 174, 183n.50, 
206n.38; evolution of, 80–83; 
identification of, from isolated teeth, 
207n.50; as “information animal,” 84; 
information overload and, 197n.33; 
self-redesign of, as organisms, 100, 
113, 139, 176, 213n.18; tropical-climate 
adaptation of, 115, 128. See also Homo 
sapiens; language, syntactic; Middle 
Stone Age, in Africa; mind, human; 
modernity; Neanderthals; super-brain, 
modern human; Upper Paleolithic
hunter-gatherers, recent, 166–168; histori-
cal change among, 167
Huxley, Thomas H., 42. See also Darwin, 
Charles
hypothalamus, 37
“ice cellar.” See storage, of perishables: 
cold
Idea of History, The (Collingwood), 106

252         index
inclusive fitness, 19. See also eusociality; 
natural selection
Industrial Revolution, 23, 105, 204n.4. 
See also Childe, V. Gordon
intentionality, 21, 121; definition of, 21, 
66; Lower Paleolithic biface and, 64, 
66–67 
iron technology, 156–157; agriculture in 
China and, 158; of Bantu-speaking 
peoples, 157; farming implements and, 
157–158; horse domestication and, 
157; horseshoes and, 161; impact of, 
on Africa, 157; weapons and, 156–157. 
See also technology
irrigation, 146, 158
Isaac, Glynn Ll., 31, 67–69. See 
also Acheulean industry; biface; 
Olorgesailie
Johanson, Donald, 47
Kabwe (Zambia), 71, 81
Kalambo Falls (Zambia), 66
Kant, Immanuel, 22, 29, 172–173, 
220nn.12–13. See also history; technol-
ogy: philosophy of
Kapp, Ernst, 22, 129. See also technology: 
philosophy of
Kemp, Barry J., 141. See also Egypt, ancient
kiln, 119, 123, 125. See also ceramic tech-
nology; Dolní Veˇstonice
Klein, Richard G., x, 196n.21. See also 
neural hypothesis
knowledge, 107, 164; history and, 107; of 
planet as a whole, 164; technological, 
108. See also Childe, V. Gordon; Kant, 
Immanuel
knuckle walking, 43, 50, 188n.40. See also 
apes; bipedalism; chimpanzee; gorilla
Konso (Ethiopia), 61
Kossinna, Gustav, 104. See also archaeol-
ogy: culture concept of; Childe, V. 
Gordon
Kostenki–Borshchevo sites (Russia), 
116–121, 123–125; earliest visual 
art at, 118, 119; EUP landscape at, 
118; human skeletal remains from, 
208n.61; Kostenki 1, 123–124; 
Kostenki 11, 125, 135; Kostenki 
14, 208n.61; Kostenki 15, 208n.61; 
mammoth-bone house at, 135. See also 
archaeology: in Soviet Union; Gravet-
tian industry; Upper Paleolithic: early 
Kramer, Samuel Noah, 150–151. See also 
Sumer
Kurzweil, Ray, 177–178. See also artificial 
intelligence
Laetoli (Tanzania), fossil footprints at, 47. 
See also bipedalism
La Marche (France), 133–134. See also 
artificial memory systems
lamps, 100; of mammoth bone, 126. See 
also technology: in Upper Paleolithic
language, syntactic, 4, 6, 11, 24, 32, 
76–77, 87–88; artifacts and, 8–9, 
31–32, 88–89, 202n.80; braille as, 110; 
compared with genetic code, 180n.23; 
consciousness and, 21, 77; hierarchi-
cal structure of, 6–7; as organism, 
198n.42; origin of, 31; “principles-
and-parameters model”  of, 180n.21; 
“protolanguage” (non-syntactic) and, 
199n.50; sign language as, 87, 96; 
throwing objects and, 195n.15; “vocal 
grooming” as, 83. See also Bickerton, 
Derek; Chomsky, Noam; honeybee; 
Minimalist Program; representations, 
mental: artificial; symbols; vocal tract, 
human
Language Research Center (Georgia State 
University), 54
Last Glacial Maximum, 24, 122, 128–129, 
131, 143, 152. See also Gravettian 
industry; Upper Paleolithic: late
Lateglacial Interstadial, 128
Later Stone Age, in Africa, 100. See also 
Upper Paleolithic
Laugerie Basse (France), 133. See also 
artificial memory systems

index        253
Leach, Edmund, 215n.47. See also Lévi-
Strauss, Claude
Leakey, Louis, 51. See also Olduvai Gorge
Leakey, Mary, 51, 55–57. See also Oldowan 
industry; Olduvai Gorge
Le Cerisier (France), 136–137. See also 
dwelling 
Leroi-Gourhan, André, x, 28, 31, 185n.79. 
See also chaîne opératoire; representa-
tions, mental: externalized; symbols: 
storage of
Levallois prepared-core technology, 
88–92, 100, 114, 199n.51, 200n.64 
Leviathan (Hobbes), 17–20. See also super-
brain, modern human 
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 28, 75, 154, 195n.8; 
on myth, 154; structuralism and, 28 
Lewontin, Richard, 19
Linnaeus, Carolus, 42
Little Ice Age, 115
Lokalalei 2C (Kenya), 58
Lolita (Nabokov), 1
Löwenmensch figurine, 101–102, 120, 128. 
See also Hohlenstein-Stadel; Upper 
Paleolithic: early; visual art
Lower Paleolithic, 52–72, 107, 166–167. 
See also Acheulean industry; biface; 
Oldowan industry
“Lucy.” See Australopithecus afarensis
Machiavellian Intelligence hypothesis, 83. 
See also “social brain hypothesis”
magnetic resonance imaging, functional 
(fMRI), 27, 92. See also brain-imaging 
technology
Man Makes Himself (Childe), 105–106
Marr, David, 40–41; theory of vision of, 
40–41. See also vision
Marshack, Alexander, 133, 181n.32. See 
also artificial memory systems; calen-
dar: lunar
Marx, Karl, 22, 105
Marxism, 105–106; cultural evolutionary 
models of, 117. See also archaeology: in 
Soviet Union; Childe, V. Gordon
mathematics, 148, 151, 157; as applied 
to technology, 151, 157, 165; as 
applied to thought, 165. See also Egypt, 
ancient; Sumer; technology
Maya, ancient civilization of the, 115, 
141, 153, 163; Late Classic, 153; Tik’al 
(city), 153. See also Egypt, ancient; 
Sumer 
McHenry, Henry, 44. See also bipedalism
Medieval Warm Period, 161
memes, 15
mental template, 4, 55–56, 67, 186n.1, 
192nn.99–100. See also Acheulean 
industry; biface; Deetz, James; 
Oldowan industry; representations, 
mental: artificial 
“mental time travel,” 35–36. See also 
intentionality; mind, human; represen-
tations, mental 
Mesozoic era, 39
Mezhirich (Ukraine), 130–131, 133. See 
also dwelling: of mammoth bones; 
traps
Mezmaiskaya Cave (Russia), 208n.57. See 
also needle, eyed
Middle Paleolithic, in Eurasia, 91, 94, 
97–100, 107, 112, 116, 166–167. See 
also Levallois prepared-core technol-
ogy; Neanderthals; tools and weapons, 
composite
Middle Stone Age, in Africa, 20, 26, 29, 
91, 94, 97, 100, 107, 109, 112; regional 
variation of artifacts in, 94–95. See 
also modernity; tools and weapons, 
composite
mind, human, ix, 11–17, 174; computa-
tional theory of, 14, 182n.44; emer-
gent properties of, 16, 63; history and, 
106–109, 172–174; modular model of, 
32, 186n.90; origin of, 78–100; super-
brain as, 77–78; transcends biological 
space and time, ix, 1, 77, 183n.49. See 
also brain; Bunge, Mario; Chomsky, 
Noam; creativity; Descartes, René; 
humans, modern; language, syntactic; 

254         index
mind, human (continued)
proto-mind; super-brain, modern 
human
mind–body dualism, 13, 172, 182n.37; 
“ghost in the machine” and, 13. See 
also Descartes, René
mineral pigments, 93–94, 97; black 
manganese dioxide, 93; red ocher, 
73, 76, 93–94, 100. See also tools and 
weapons, composite 
Minimalist Program, 76–77. See also 
Chomsky, Noam; language, syntactic; 
super-brain, modern human
Miocene epoch, 41–44, 47, 50
Mithen, Steven, 30
modernity: archaeological definition of, 
74–75, 78; behavioral, 4, 11, 73, 88; defi-
nition of, 4–5; disconnect of, with mod-
ern human anatomy, 79–80; genetic 
mutation and, 32, 81; language and, 78; 
“shopping list” approach to, 4–5, 74. See 
also language, syntactic; mind, human; 
prefrontal cortex; super-brain, modern 
human; working memory
mole rat, African, 170, 183n.57, 219n.3. 
See also eusociality; super-organism
mollusks, 37 
Morgan, Lewis Henry, 105. See also archae-
ology: in Soviet Union; Marxism
Mountcastle, Vernon, 48. See also hand, 
human
Mount Toba (Sumatra), volcanic eruption 
of, 78. See also modernity
Mumford, Lewis, 12, 140, 162, 165; on 
civilization as mega-machine, 140; 
on mechanical clock, 12; on slavery, 
162, 217n.73. See also nation-state or 
civilization; technology
music, 75, 101, 188n.34, 195n.7, 206n.33; 
instruments, 101, 109–110, 181n.29. 
See also Geissenklösterle; Hohle Fels 
Cave; Upper Paleolithic: early
myelin, 37
Nabokov, Vladimir, 1
Napier, John Russell, 48–49, 51–52. See 
also hand, human
Nariokotome (Kenya), 52, 61
Narmada (India), 71
nation-state or civilization, 141–142, 
148, 152; creativity and, 142–143; 
monumental architecture of, 141–142, 
150–151; as reorganized super-brain, 
141, 148. See also China; Egypt, 
ancient; Greece, ancient; Maya; 
Roman Empire; Sumer
Natufian culture, 144–145, 153, 213n.20. 
See also Bar-Yosef, Ofer 
natural selection, 8, 13, 19, 31. See also 
Darwin, Charles; eusociality
Nazi Party, 22, 104
Ndutu (Tanzania), 81
Neanderthals (Homo neanderthalensis), 4, 
79–83, 91, 93, 99–100, 111–112, 116; 
anatomy of, 82–83; brain volume of, 
82; burials of, 121, 208n.63; cognitive 
archaeology of, 95–96; cold adaptation 
by, 83, 196n.25; competition of, with 
modern humans, 79, 114; “cultures” 
or “tribes” of, 94; genetic drift and, 
196n.25; genome of, 88, 195n.14; 
large-mammal hunting by, 93; orna-
ments of, 203n.90; as “promiscuous 
horde,” 205n.26; retromolar space of, 
82. See also Binford, Lewis; Bordes, 
François; Homo heidelbergensis; Middle 
Paleolithic, in Eurasia; tools and weap-
ons, composite
needle, eyed, 101, 119, 120, 126, 208n.57; 
cases for, 126. See also Upper Paleo-
lithic: early
neocortex, 38–39  
Neolithic Revolution, 105, 140. See also 
Childe, V. Gordon
nerve cells. See neurons
nets, 101. See also technology: in Upper 
Paleolithic
neural crest, 37. See also brain: evolution of
neural hypothesis, 32, 81, 196n.21. See 
also humans, modern: anatomy of; 

index        255
Klein, Richard G.; language, syntactic; 
modernity
neurons, 15–16, 35–37, 65. See also 
synapses
neurotechnology. See technology: 
information
Noble, William, 192n.100, 200n.64, 
202n.85. See also archaeology: 
cognitive
Notarchirico (Italy), 194n.122
notochord, 37
noumena (things-in-themselves), 22, 29. 
See also Dessauer, Frederick; Kant, 
Immanuel; phenomena; technology: 
philosophy of
Ohalo II (Israel), 143–144, 213n.18. See 
also agriculture; baking oven 
Oldowan industry (Lower Paleolithic), 
53–62, 68, 191n.78; association of, 
with Homo, 191n.83; categories of arti-
facts of, 55; “Developed Oldowan B” 
assemblages of, 57; microscopic wear 
on artifacts of, 56; problem of defin-
ing artifacts of, 55; “spheroids” of, 
192n.99. See also biface; Leakey, Mary; 
mental template; Olduvai Gorge; 
proto-biface; Toth, Nicholas
Olduvai Gorge (Tanzania), 51–52, 
54–60, 62, 190n.73, 191n.83; major 
artifact-bearing units of, 57–58. See 
also Acheulean industry; Oldowan 
industry 
Old World Monkeys, 15, 39, 41. See also 
primates
Oligocene epoch, 39
Olorgesailie (Kenya), 68–70. See also Isaac, 
Glynn Ll.
Omo Kibish (Ethiopia), 81. See also 
humans, modern: anatomy of
On the Origin of Species (Darwin), 13, 78
optic tectum, 37–38. See also vision
orangutan, 42. See also apes
ornaments, 98–99, 113–114; of Neander-
thals, 203n.90; of perforated shell, 
98–99, 113–114, 203n.88. See also 
Blombos Cave; Oued Djebbana; Skhul   
Orrorin turgenensis, 47. See also bipedalism
Oswalt, Wendell H., 219n.96. See also 
techno-units
Oued Djebbana (Algeria), 98–99 
Paleozoic era, 38
Paranthropus robustus, 51–52, 54, 57. See 
also hand, human
Pasteurella pestis. See bubonic plague
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 181n.31. See also 
representations, mental; symbols
Peloponnesian War, 157. See also Greece, 
ancient
pelvis, human, 45. See also bipedalism
Peninj (Tanzania), 200n.55
periglacial steppe, 122–123
Persian Empire, 156 
Petralona (Greece), 71, 81. See also Homo 
heidelbergensis
phenomena (things-as-they-appear), 22. 
See also Dessauer, Frederick; Kant, 
Immanuel; noumena; technology: 
philosophy of
Philip of Macedon, 157. See also Greece, 
ancient
Philosophy of History (Hegel), 173
phrase structure grammar, 7, 11. See also 
language, syntactic
Pinker, Steven, 14, 75, 195n.7. See also 
mind, human
Plateau Parrain (France), 137. See also 
dwelling
Platyhelminthes, 36. See also brain: evolu-
tion of
Pleistocene epoch (Ice Age), 128
plow, 149, 158, 161; in China, 158; iron, 
158; moldboard, 161. See also agricul-
ture; technology: innovation in
Pool, Robert, 25. See also super-brain, 
modern human
positron-emission tomography (PET), 
27, 32, 85, 193n.102. See also brain-
imaging technology

256         index
pottery, 129, 131, 145; mass production 
of, in Mesopotamia, 150; of Upper 
Paleolithic, 129, 131–132. See also 
Sumer; Yuchanyan Cave
Povinelli, Daniel J., 189n.43. See also apes: 
cognitive abilities of
prefrontal cortex, 84–85, 92; creativity 
and, 85; expansion of, 84–85; working 
memory and, 92. See also brain; creativ-
ity; Goldberg, Elkhonon; humans, 
modern; working memory
primates, 35, 39–41, 50; arboreal adapta-
tion of, 40, 188n.25; evolution of, 
39–52; prosimians, 39; tamarins, 
7; vervet monkeys, 202n.83; “visual 
predation” by, 40; vocal communica-
tion by, 96, 202n.83. See also apes; 
catarrhines
printing, 163; with movable type, 148, 
163. See also technology: information
Proconsul, 41, 50, 188n.36
prokaryotes, 35
Proto-Aurignacian industry, 116, 118. See 
also Upper Paleolithic: early
proto-biface, 53, 58, 59, 191n.80. See also 
biface; Leakey, Mary; mental template; 
Oldowan industry
proto-mind, 30, 53–54, 63–72. See also 
Acheulean industry; biface; mind, 
human 
protozoa, 35
Prussia, 173
“punctuated equilibria,” 43
quipu, 153. See also technology: 
information
racism, 104, 167
radar early-warning system, 176
radiocarbon calibration curve, 206n.29
Rappaport, Roy A., 213n.16
Renfrew, Colin, 27, 65. See also archaeol-
ogy: cognitive
representations, mental, 2, 15, 35, 64, 
68, 186n.92; artificial or semantic, 
2, 30, 35, 63–66, 77, 110; definition 
of, 179n.6; externalized (phenotypic), 
x, 2–5, 8, 25–26, 30, 33–34, 43–44, 
52–53, 63–65, 70, 76, 96, 171; feedback 
between internal and external, 58–60, 
68, 89, 199n.49; as “fossil record of 
thought,” 28; as geometric forms 
imposed on external world, 25–26, 
136–137, 214n.32; iconic, 11, 68; natu-
ral, 2, 110; symbolic, 76; visual, 40–41, 
110. See also biface; hand, human; 
honeybee; symbols; technology; vision; 
visual art; vocal tract, human
reptiles, 38
retina, 40–41. See also vision
roadways, 147
Roche, Hélène, 58. See also Oldowan 
industry; representations, mental: feed-
back between internal and external
Rodman, Peter, 44. See also bipedalism
Roe, Derek, 67. See also Acheulean indus-
try; biface
Rogachev, A. N., 118, 124, 208n.61. See 
also Kostenki–Borshchevo sites; Upper 
Paleolithic: early
Roman Empire, 142, 161–162; water 
wheels in, 212n.15, 218n.74. See also 
China; Greece, ancient
Sahelanthropus tchadensis, 46–47. See also 
bipedalism 
Santorini, volcanic eruption of, 115
Sargon, 156. See also Akkadian state
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 28
“sense of self,” 21, 77. See also 
consciousness
Sensory Hand, The (Mountcastle), 48
sharks, 38
Shaw, George Bernard, 178
Shelley, Mary, 23, 175, 176, 178, 220n.18
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 175
shouldered stone point, 121. See also 
Gravettian industry
Sima de los Huesos, Atapuerca (Spain), 
82

index        257
Skhul (Israel), 98–99 
slavery, 139, 148, 161; decline of, 161, 
217n.73; technology and, 161–162 
Smail, Daniel Lord, 205n.22
“social brain hypothesis,” 20. See also 
Dunbar, Robin; language, syntactic
social insects. See eusociality
Society and Knowledge (Childe), 107
“soft-hammer” flaking technique, 114
Sollas, William J., 166
somesthetic, humans as, 48. See also hand, 
human: as sensory organ
space, exploration of, 178
spear-thrower, 101, 119, 129, 130. See 
also Combe-Saunière I; technology: 
mechanical; Upper Paleolithic: late
Spencer, Herbert, 172
Spengler, Oswald, 106
split-base point, of antler, 119, 120. See 
also Aurignacian industry; technology; 
Upper Paleolithic: early
sponges, 35. See also brain: evolution of
stable isotope analysis, of bone, 123
Stellmoor (Germany), 129. See also bow 
and arrow
storage, of perishables, 123–125, 132–
133; cold, 123–125; pits for, 123–125, 
133. See also Gravettian industry; 
Upper Paleolithic: late
storage, of symbols. See symbols: storage of
structuralism, 28
Study of History, A (Toynbee), 106. See also 
Collingwood, R. G.; history
Sumer, 148–152, 214n.26; calendar in, 
152; origin of (“labor revolution”), 
148, 156; technology in, 148–151; 
temples and ziggurats in, 150–151, 
153; Ur, 151, 153; wheel in, 151; writ-
ing in, 148–149. See also China; Egypt, 
ancient; Kramer, Samuel Noah; Maya; 
Roman Empire; urban center
super-brain, modern human, ix, 16, 32, 
63–64, 70, 88, 103, 126, 138–139, 
170–171; compared with honeybee 
super-brain, 75, 171; “consciousness” 
of, 165; definition of, 75; of Gravet-
tian, 126; integration of, 76, 99, 141, 
152, 161; nation-state as reorganized, 
141, 148–149, 212n.6; super-organism 
and, 173. See also honeybee; language, 
syntactic; mind, human; modernity; 
super-organism
super-organism, 17, 19, 170, 173. See 
also eusociality; super-brain, modern 
human
supra-orbital torus (brow ridge), 70
Swartkrans (South Africa), 52, 54, 
191n.83
symbols, 5, 15, 74, 181n.31; archaeologi-
cal traces of, 29, 76, 97–100, 133; in 
brain, 36, 182n.45; storage of, 5, 16, 
74, 149, 194n.5. See also Bickerton, 
Derek; Donald, Merlin; language, 
syntactic; Leroi-Gourhan, André
synapses (synaptic connections), 16, 36, 
65. See also brain; neurons
syntax, 6, 180n.21. See also language, 
syntactic
Szeletian industry, 112. See also Upper 
Paleolithic: early
Tasmanians, 166. See also Australians; his-
tory: “people without”
Tattersall, Ian, 80. See also humans, 
modern
technology, 2, 7–8, 110–111; in ancient 
Greece, 157–158; as applied to sci-
ence, 165; biotechnology, 132, 177; in 
China, 158–160; creativity and, 74; 
information (“neurotechnology”), 119, 
132–133, 148, 152, 164, 176, 214n.35; 
innovation in, 122, 129, 140, 148–152, 
156–166; mathematics applied to,  
151; mechanical, 101, 129–130, 159; 
military, 156–157, 164, 174, 176, 
216n.56; mind and, 2, 13, 22–23, 110; 
philosophy of (Philosophie der Technik), 
22–26; of recent hunter-gatherers, 
167–168; in Roman Empire, 212n.14; 
slavery and, 161–162; in Sumer, 

258         index
technology (continued)
148–151; in Upper Paleolithic, 7–8, 
111, 119–120, 123–126, 129–137, 
181n.30; worldview and, 12–13, 111, 
137. See also ceramic technology; Des-
sauer, Frederick; Heidegger, Martin; 
iron technology; Kapp, Ernst; repre-
sentations, mental: externalized
techno-units, 92–93, 200n.59, 219n.96
time, 1, 154, 161; biological, as tran-
scended by mind, ix, 1, 77, 183n.49; 
cyclical concept of, 154; Judeo-Chris-
tian concept of, 161, 217n.71; linear 
concept of, 154, 161; Saint Augustine 
on, 217n.71; timescape of the mind, 
163. See also clock, mechanical; his-
tory; mind, human
tools and weapons, composite, 4, 88–89, 
91–93, 200n.60, 202n.78; adhesives 
and, 91, 94; manufacture of, by Nean-
derthals, 91; red ocher and, 94. See also 
Levallois prepared-core technology; 
Middle Paleolithic, in Eurasia; Middle 
Stone Age, in Africa; techno-units
Tossal de la Roca (Spain), 133. See also 
artificial memory systems
Toth, Nicholas, 55, 58, 67. See also biface; 
mental template; Oldowan industry
Toynbee, Arnold, 106. See also history
traps (and snares) for small mammals, 
101, 118, 130–131, 175; components 
of, at Mezhirich, 130–131; robots or 
“smart machines” as, 175. See also 
technology: mechanical
Trigger, Bruce, 106, 203n.1. See also 
Childe, V. Gordon
Turing, Alan, 177. See also artificial 
intelligence
‘Ubeidiya (Israel), 70
Üçag˘izli Cave (Turkey), 114. See also 
Upper Paleolithic: early
Uluzzian industry, 112. See also Upper 
Paleolithic: early
untended facilities. See traps
Upper Paleolithic, 7–11, 108–109, 
138–139, 142, 144, 148, 150, 167, 
175–177; early (EUP), 10, 16, 26, 29, 
99–101, 109–121, 167, 176, 206n.33; 
early, as transitional from Middle 
Paleolithic, 111–112; as history, 
102, 108–137, 205n.22; landscape 
modification in, 211n.1; late, 26, 91, 
102, 109, 128–137, 153; middle, 24, 
121–128, 167; worldview in, 111. See 
also cave paintings; Gravettian indus-
try; language, syntactic; Later Stone 
Age, in Africa; modernity; super-brain, 
modern human; technology; visual  
art
Ur (Iraq), 150. See also Sumer
urban center (city), 108, 146–148, 153; as 
created social environment, 153. See 
also China; city-state; Maya; Sumer 
Urban Revolution, 105, 140, 148; in 
Sumer, 148. See also Childe, V. Gor-
don; nation-state or civilization
Uruk (Iraq), 146–148, 150
“Venus” figurine, 121, 127–128. See also 
Gravettian industry; visual art
vertebrae, human, 45, 85–86 
vertebrates, 37–38 
Victoria West cores, 199n.54. See also 
Levallois prepared-core technology
village, 108, 145–146; periglacial, in late 
Upper Paleolithic, 128–137 
vision, 34, 38–41; color, 40, 48; as 
information processing, 40–41; visual 
cortex, 40. See also brain; catarrhines; 
Marr, David; optic tectum; representa-
tions, mental: visual
visual art, 9–10, 206n.34; earliest known, 
118, 119; in early Upper Paleolithic, 
10, 109, 113, 118, 119, 206n.33; of 
Gravettian, 121, 127–128; language 
and, 202n.85; in late Upper Paleo-
lithic, 137; super-brain or collective 
mind, internal to, 110. See also cave 
paintings; super-brain, modern 

index        259
human: integration of; Upper 
Paleolithic
vocal tract, human, 2–4, 35, 50, 80, 
85–88; anatomy of, 85–86; choking 
risk of, 81, 86, 196n.18; evolution of, 
87; hyoid, 4; reconstruction of, in 
fossil record, 3–4, 87. See also hand, 
human; language, syntactic; represen-
tations, mental
Vogelherd Cave (Germany), 120
Wadley, Lyn, 74, 94. See also modernity; 
symbols: storage of
walking, 44, 47. See also bipedalism
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 13–14. See also 
Darwin, Charles; mind–body dualism
watercraft, 100, 113, 150, 159; axial rud-
der of, 164; in China, 159; magnetic 
compass and, 159, 164. See also China; 
humans, modern: colonization of 
Australia by; Sumer
water power (hydropower), 159, 162, 
218n.74; applications of, 159, 162; 
tidal mills and, 162; water wheels and, 
162, 218n.74
weights and measures, 141, 158. See also 
nation-state or civilization
Western Christendom, attitude of, toward 
nature, 161. See also clock, mechanical; 
technology: innovation in
What Happened in History (Childe), 
105–106
wheel, 150. See also Sumer
Wheeler, William Morton, 17
White, Lynn, 161
Willandra Lakes (Australia), 113
Wilson, Edward O., 17. See also ants; euso-
ciality; honeybee; super-organism
wind power, 150, 162–163; sailboats  
and, 150; windmills and, 162–163,  
218n.77  
witchcraft, 163
working memory, 32, 92, 96. See also 
Coolidge, Frederick; prefrontal cortex; 
Wynn, Thomas
writing, 141, 148; pictograph as, 148–149. 
See also nation-state or civilization; 
super-brain, modern human
Wynn, Thomas, 96, 186n.90, 202n.80. 
See also archaeology: cognitive
Younger Dryas period, 145
Yuchanyan Cave (China), 131, 133. See 
also pottery
Yudinovo (Russia), 133. See also dwelling: 
of mammoth bones
Zaraisk (Russia), 123. See also Gravettian 
industry








