
Table of Contents
Cover
Table of Contents
Title Page
Copyright Page
Preface
1 The Concept of Logic
1.1. Syllogisms
1.2. Elementary operations of propositional calculus
1.3. Tools of deductive reasoning
1.4. Quantification
1.5. Prenex forms and pure forms
2 Sets and Relationships
2.1. Generalities
2.2. Algebra of sets
2.3. Parts and partitions
2.4. Cartesian product
2.5. Binary relationships
2.6. Properties of relationships
2.7. Applications
3 Counting and Combinatorial Analysis
3.1. Set cardinals
3.2. Permutations, arrangements, combinations
3.3. Properties of binomial coefficients
3.4. Stirling’s formula
4 Boolean Algebra and Boolean Functions
4.1. Special elements of an ordered set

4.2. Lattice
4.3. Boolean algebra
4.4. Boolean functions
5 Logic Circuits
5.1. Canonical forms of a Boolean function
5.2. Reduction of a Boolean function
5.3. Karnaugh tables
5.4. Elementary logic circuits
5.5. A little on electronics
5.6. Construction of logical functions
5.7. A basic circuit: the binary adder
6 Arithmetic
6.1. Reminder about integers
6.2. Euclidean division
6.3. Divisibility and prime numbers
6.4. GCD and LCM
6.5. Congruencies
6.6. Elliptic curves
6.7. Identity, theorem and Bézout algorithm
7 Error Protection
7.1. General context
7.2. Linear codes
7.3. Polynomial codes
7.4. Convolutional codes
8 Encryption Systems
8.1. Substitution and transposition
8.2. Substitution methods
8.3. Transposition methods
8.4. Asymmetric systems

8.5. DES – secret key system
8.6. RSA – public key system
8.7. Cryptography with elliptic curves
8.8. Quantum cryptography
8.9. Appendix: The Crow and the Fox
9 Probabilities
9.1. Chance
9.2. Counting and probabilities
9.3. Events and probabilities
9.4. Statistics and probabilities
9.5. Compound probabilities
9.6. Graphs, states, transitions
9.7. Markov chains
10 Descriptive Statistics
10.1. Statistical description
10.2. Graphical representations
10.3. Position parameters
10.4. Dispersion parameters
10.5. Linear adjustment
10.6. Chronological series
10.7. Covariance and correlation
11 Probability Laws and Simulation
11.1. Random variables
11.2. Mathematical expectation, variance and standard deviation
11.3. Distribution function
11.4. Usual probability laws
11.5. General information on simulation
11.6. Generating programs
11.7. M/M/1 waiting system

11.8. Appendices
References
List of Authors
Index
End User License Agreement
List of Tables
Chapter 1
Table 1.1. Categories of propositions
Table 1.2. Categories of propositions
Chapter 11
Table 11.1. Comparison of Poisson’s law and exponential law
List of Illustrations
Chapter 1
Figure 1.1. Syllogism classes
Figure 1.2. Negation truth table
Figure 1.3. Trisection of an angle of 180°
Figure 1.4. Conjunction truth table
Figure 1.5. Disjunction truth table
Figure 1.6. “Exclusive or” truth table
Figure 1.7. Conditional truth table
Figure 1.8. Truth table
Figure 1.9. Truth table
Figure 1.10. Biconditional truth table
Figure 1.11. Possible binary operations

Figure 1.12. Representation of the different truth tables
Figure 1.13. Truth table
Figure 1.14. Truth table
Figure 1.15. Modus ponens
Figure 1.16. Modus tollens
Figure 1.17. Inference by case
Chapter 2
Figure 2.1. Element, membership, set
Figure 2.2. Inclusion
Figure 2.3. Representation of propositions P1, P2, P3
Figure 2.4. Intersection, union, complementarity
Figure 2.5. Partition 1
Figure 2.6. Partition 2
Figure 2.7. Partition 3
Figure 2.8. Partition 4
Figure 2.9. ℛ relationship graph
Figure 2.10. ℛ relationship graph
Figure 2.11. Reverse of R
Figure 2.12. Composition of relationships.
Figure 2.13. Reflexivity and non-reflexivity
Figure 2.14. Reflexivity
Figure 2.15. Symmetry and antisymmetry
Figure 2.16. Symmetry, antisymmetry
Figure 2.17. Transitivity
Figure 2.18. Equivalence classes
Figure 2.19. Order relationship

Figure 2.20. Partial order, total order
Figure 2.21. Applications
Figure 2.22. Surjection, injection and bijection
Figure 2.23. Composition of two applications.
Figure 2.24. Number of applications from A to B.
Figure 2.25. Characteristic function
Chapter 3
Figure 3.1. Fundamental operations
Figure 3.2. Pascal’s triangle
Figure 3.3. Comparison between n! and the value of Stirling
Figure 3.4. Trapezoid method
Chapter 4
Figure 4.1. Hasse diagram
Figure 4.2. Hasse diagram
Figure 4.3. Hasse diagram
Figure 4.4. P = {2, 3, 5, 10}.
Figure 4.5. P = {2, 3, 5, 10}.
Figure 4.6. P = {2, 3, 5, 10}.
Figure 4.7. P = {2, 5, 10}.
Figure 4.8. Where are the lattices?
Figure 4.9. Correspondence between E, V, 
Figure 4.10. Truth tables
Figure 4.11. Hasse diagram
Figure 4.12. Inclusions
Figure 4.13. Truth tables
Figure 4.14. Hasse diagram

Figure 4.15. Truth tables and Hasse diagram
Figure 4.16. Example of a Boolean function
Figure 4.17. Boolean algebra B1
Figure 4.18. Boolean algebra B2
Figure 4.19. Hasse diagram
Chapter 5
Figure 5.1. The four possible functions
Figure 5.2. The 16 possible functions of F2
Figure 5.3. Identification of minterms
Figure 5.4. Identification of minterms
Figure 5.5. Identification of maxterm
Figure 5.6. Identification of maxterms
Figure 5.7. Reduction of F2 functions
Figure 5.8. Practical table
Figure 5.9. Karnaugh tables
Figure 5.10. Table with 0s and 1s
Figure 5.11. Practical form of Karnaugh tables
Figure 5.12. Truth table
Figure 5.13. Karnaugh table
Figure 5.14. Decomposition
Figure 5.15(a). 
Figure 5.15(b). 
Figure 5.15(c). 
Figure 5.16. NOT function
Figure 5.17. Truth table for NOT
Figure 5.18. NOT gate

Figure 5.19. YES circuit
Figure 5.20. Truth table for AND
Figure 5.21. AND gate
Figure 5.22. Truth table for OR
Figure 5.23. OR gate
Figure 5.24. Truth table for XOR
Figure 5.25. XOR gate
Figure 5.26. Truth table for NAND
Figure 5.27. NAND gate
Figure 5.28. Equivalence of circuits
Figure 5.29. Truth table for XOR
Figure 5.30. XOR gate
Figure 5.31. Equivalence of circuits
Figure 5.32. Complete logic group {NAND, NOR, XOR}
Figure 5.33. Complete logical group {NOT, AND}
Figure 5.34. Complete logical group {NOT, OR}
Figure 5.35. Complete logic group {NOR}
Figure 5.36. Complete logic group {NAND}
Figure 5.37. Diode
Figure 5.38. PNP transistor
Figure 5.39. PNP schematization
Figure 5.40. NPN transistor
Figure 5.41. NPN schematization
Figure 5.42. Transistor operation
Figure 5.43. A hardware circuit in a DIL package
Figure 5.44. Microprocessor

Figure 5.45. Voltage definition of bits 0 and 1
Figure 5.46. NOT gate made by a transistor
Figure 5.47 OR gate made with two diodes
Figure 5.48. Truth table of f(x, y, z)
Figure 5.49. Karnaugh tables
Figure 5.50. Logic circuit proposal
Figure 5.51. Karnaugh tables
Figure 5.52. First proposal for a logic circuit
Figure 5.53. Second logic circuit proposal
Figure 5.54. Karnaugh tables
Figure 5.55. Proposed logic circuit
Figure 5.56. Binary addition
Figure 5.57. Truth tables for S and R
Figure 5.58. Logic circuit for S and R
Figure 5.59. Full adder
Figure 5.60. Electronic adder schema
Figure 5.61. The SN7483 box
Chapter 6
Figure 6.1. |r − r′| < b
Figure 6.2. Decomposition into powers of 2
Figure 6.3. Example of an elliptic curve
Figure 6.4. Another example of an elliptic curve
Figure 6.5. Graphical representation of the Γ curve
Figure 6.6. Addition table
Chapter 7
Figure 7.1. Error packets

Figure 7.2. Distribution of error packets
Figure 7.3. Echoplex mode
Figure 7.4. Encoding and decoding
Figure 7.5. Systematic code
Figure 7.6. Valid words and incorrect words
Figure 7.7. Rule R1
Figure 7.8. Rule R2
Figure 7.9. Rule R3
Figure 7.10. Structure of the G matrix
Figure 7.11. Structure of the H matrix
Figure 7.12. Parity bit
Figure 7.13. VRC and LRC
Figure 7.14. Serial transmission
Figure 7.15. Division of z3X(z) by H(z)
Figure 7.16. Convolutional code (3,1)
Figure 7.17. Tree diagram
Figure 7.18. State diagram
Figure 7.19. Lattice diagram
Chapter 8
Figure 8.1. Schema of an encryption system
Figure 8.2. Encryption table
Figure 8.3. Caesar’s code
Figure 8.4. ASCII code offset
Figure 8.5. Frequency analysis for French texts
Figure 8.6. The text to decipher
Figure 8.7. Number of appearances of letters in the encrypted text

Figure 8.8. Probable encryption
Figure 8.9. First replacements
Figure 8.10. Deciphering attempts
Figure 8.11. Text almost deciphered
Figure 8.12. Plain text
Figure 8.13. Vigenère code
Figure 8.14. Correspondence table
Figure 8.15. Vigenère table
Figure 8.16. Text encryption
Figure 8.17. Letter–number matching
Figure 8.18. Matching for key
Figure 8.19. The code
Figure 8.20. ASCII code of J
Figure 8.21. Basic operation
Figure 8.22. Iterations
Figure 8.23. Communication between A and B
Figure 8.24. Communication between A and B (continued)
Figure 8.25. Encryption process
Figure 8.26. IP and IP−1 swap (permutation operation)
Figure 8.27. Definition of function f
Figure 8.28. Operations E and P
Figure 8.29. Operations S1–S8
Figure 8.30. Transformation of sextet 101100
Figure 8.31. PC-1 and PC-2
Figure 8.32. Definition of PC-1 and PC-2
Figure 8.33. Number of offsets based on key number

Figure 8.34. Message signature
Figure 8.35. $1 banknote according to Wiesner
Figure 8.36. Polarized photon
Figure 8.37. Different scenarios
Figure 8.38. “ + ”schema
Figure 8.39. “ × ” schema
Figure 8.40. Coding schemas
Figure 8.41. Table of possible options
Figure 8.42. Various situations
Figure 8.43. Synthesis
Figure 8.44. Vector representation
Figure 8.45. Other schema states
Chapter 9
Figure 9.1. INSEE 2016 survey
Figure 9.2. Case tree
Figure 9.3. Evolution of a system by transitions between states
Figure 9.4. Evolution of a system
Figure 9.5. Various transitions between states
Figure 9.6. p12·p23·p34
Figure 9.7. p1 + p2 + p3
Figure 9.8. Transition probabilities
Figure 9.9. Evolution of a system over time
Figure 9.10. The world of the rabbit
Figure 9.11. Incomplete graph
Figure 9.12. Completed graph
Figure 9.13. Transition graph

Figure 9.14. Transition graph
Figure 9.15. Evolution towards Ek
Figure 9.16. Transition graph
Chapter 10
Figure 10.1. Statistical series table
Figure 10.2. Effective table and frequency
Figure 10.3. Effective table and frequency
Figure 10.4. Amplitude class 4
Figure 10.5. Amplitude class 6
Figure 10.6. Statistical series with different amplitude classes
Figure 10.7. Number, frequency and increasing cumulative
frequency
Figure 10.8. Number, frequency, decreasing cumulative frequency
Figure 10.9. Two-dimensional series
Figure 10.10. Bar chart.
Figure 10.11. Polygon of sizes.
Figure 10.12. Case of a continuous character.
Figure 10.13. Histogram representation.
Figure 10.14. Unequal classes
Figure 10.15. Histograms
Figure 10.16. Cumulative size
Figure 10.17. Cumulative chart.
Figure 10.18. Cumulative polygon.
Figure 10.19. Case of a continuous character.
Figure 10.20. Principle of a polar diagram
Figure 10.21. Polar diagram.

Figure 10.22. Pie chart.
Figure 10.23. Figurative diagram
Figure 10.24. A point cloud
Figure 10.25. Multiple modes.
Figure 10.26. Determining the median.
Figure 10.27. First case
Figure 10.28. Second case
Figure 10.29. Statistical tableThe median size is half the total
size, whi...
Figure 10.30. Statistical table
Figure 10.31. Cumulative polygons.
Figure 10.32. Quartiles
Figure 10.33. Frequency table
Figure 10.34. Table of operations
Figure 10.35. Comparison of position parameters.
Figure 10.36. Symmetric statistical distribution.
Figure 10.37. Extent and interquartile range.
Figure 10.38. Interdecile range.
Figure 10.39. Table for calculating dispersion parameters
Figure 10.40. Table in Figure 10.39 completed
Figure 10.41. Percentage table
Figure 10.42. Lorenz curve
Figure 10.43. Graphic adjustment.
Figure 10.44. Mean point method.
Figure 10.45. Scaled average method
Figure 10.46. Moving average method

Figure 10.47. Least squares method.
Figure 10.48. Statistical distribution.
Figure 10.49. Details of calculations
Figure 10.50. Linear adjustment.
Figure 10.51. Change in the number of job applications
Figure 10.52. Change year by year.
Figure 10.53. Change month by month.
Figure 10.54. Representation of change.
Figure 10.55. Detailed calculations
Figure 10.56. Adjustment line for the general trend.
Figure 10.57. Determination of seasonal coefficients
Figure 10.58. Monthly seasonal coefficients
Figure 10.59. Ratio process.
Figure 10.60. Highlighting seasonal variations
Figure 10.61. Modified ratios
Figure 10.62. Ratio chain process.
Figure 10.63. Linear regression lines.
Figure 10.64. Details of calculations
Figure 10.65. Regression lines.
Figure 10.66. Overview of r values
Chapter 11
Figure 11.1. Graphical representation of the probability law.
Figure 11.2. Graphical representation of the probability law.
Figure 11.3. Problem situation
Figure 11.4. Probability density.
Figure 11.5. Probability density.

Figure 11.6. Probability density.
Figure 11.7. Distribution function.
Figure 11.8. Distribution function.
Figure 11.9. Binomial law.
Figure 11.10. Poisson’s law.
Figure 11.11. Exponential law.
Figure 11.12. Normal law.
Figure 11.13. p (X < x).
Figure 11.14. p(a ≤ X ≤ b).
Figure 11.15. Simulation result.
Figure 11.16. Areas for throwing points.
Figure 11.17. Bernoulli’s lemniscate.
Figure 11.18. Definition of zones for simulation.
Figure 11.19. Using the distribution function.
Figure 11.20. Any probability law
Figure 11.21. Any probability law
Figure 11.22. Using number ranges
Figure 11.23. Arrivals and departures table
Figure 11.24. M/M/1 waiting system
Figure 11.25. Two equivalent ways of seeing a waiting system
Figure 11.26. Markov process
Figure 11.27. nS, nF: number of individuals in the system and in
the queue
Figure 11.28. Timelines
Figure 11.29. Consecutive time intervals
Figure 11.30. Completed tables

Figure 11.31. Results
Figure 11.32. Geometry of the problem
Figure 11.33. Different scenarios
OceanofPDF.com

SCIENCES
Computer Science,
Field Director – Jean-Charles Pomerol
Operational Research and Decision,
Subject Head – Patrick Siarry
Mathematics for Digital Science
1
Fundamentals
Gérard-Michel Cochard
Mhand Hifi

OceanofPDF.com

First published 2025 in Great Britain and the United States by ISTE Ltd and John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or review, as
permitted under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, this publication may only be
reproduced, or in the case of reprographic reproduction in accordance with the terms and licenses
issued by the CLA. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside these terms should be sent to the
publishers at the under mentioned address:
ISTE Ltd
27-37 St George’s Road
London SW19 4EU
UK
www.iste.co.uk
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
111 River Street
Hoboken, NJ 07030
USA
www.wiley.com
© ISTE Ltd 2025
The rights of Jean-Michel André and Philippe Jonnard to be identified as the authors of this work
have been asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the author(s), contributor(s) or editor(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of ISTE Group.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2024946485
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-78945-194-8
ERC code:
PE1 Mathematics
PE1_17 Mathematical aspects of computer science
PE1_20 Control theory, optimisation and operational research
OceanofPDF.com

Preface
The term digital relates to information and communication sciences and
technologies, covering areas such as computing, digital electronics and
telecommunications. Advances in these fields, in terms of discoveries,
developments and applications, have grown exponentially over the last 50
years. Such progress has profoundly transformed human activities, making
the transition to "all digital" a significant issue not only economically, but
also politically. Concurrently, professions related to digital technology are
constantly evolving. It is noteworthy that these technological advances are
based on a substantial mathematical foundation. Thus, any engineer or
researcher aiming to drive innovation must possess a strong knowledge of
mathematics.
Many students opt for computer science-related courses early on without
first acquiring the essential mathematical foundations they might need in
the future. While they can certainly excel as technicians, they may not be as
well prepared to become effective engineers or researchers.
It should be recognized that computer science cannot be conceived without
a solid mathematical basis. Advances in digital technologies have been
closely linked to the support of mathematics. The pioneers of computing
were above all mathematicians: Alan Turing, Claude Shannon, John Von
Neumann and even Charles Babbage, who is nicknamed the grandfather of
computing. They could never have designed computers without their
mathematical expertise. Other historical figures such as Euclid, who
formulated the first algorithm in history, George Boole, father of binary
algebra, Ada Lovelace, pioneer in the creation of the first computer
programs, Grace Hopper, to whom the first language compiler is attributed,
and Margaret Hamilton, a key figure in software engineering, were also
mathematicians. Today, areas such as artificial intelligence, managing large
datasets, and information security are at the heart of computer science
research. Once again, it is evident that without a solid mathematical
foundation, it is difficult to innovate in these areas.
The digital mathematics courses offered aim to meet the need for
fundamental mathematical knowledge essential for mastering and

advancing digital technologies. While the book primarily targets university
and engineering school students, it also serves as a resource for working IT
professionals seeking to enhance their mathematical skills as part of
continuing education in their respective field.
The three-volume work compiles the lessons taught to numerous
generations of students in the first two university cycles, specifically in
Bachelor's/Master's degrees in Computer Science or in Computer Methods
Applied to Business Management. The first – and present – volume covers
the essential mathematical foundations for approaching digital technologies
and is described below, while the second volume focuses on digital
information, and the third volume is devoted to data analysis and
optimization.
Chapter 1 of the present (first) volume presents the fundamental concepts of
logic and establishes the foundations of deductive reasoning.
Chapter 2 covers the fundamentals of sets and binary relations, while
Chapter 3 focuses on combinatorial analysis.
Chapter 4 covers the definition and properties of the structure of Boolean
algebra, as well as the manipulation of Boolean functions. Subsequently,
Chapter 5 addresses the theoretical aspects of electronic circuits and their
practical implementation for the manufacture of electronic modules.
Chapter 6 revisits arithmetic concepts that were once foundational in
mathematics education in primary and secondary schools, now highlighting
their profound relevance in the field of information security. Chapters 7 and
8 explore data protection and confidentiality, addressing error detection and
correction codes, as well as encryption systems.
The last three chapters, namely 9, 10 and 11, focus on data processing and
the predictions that can be derived from it. They re-examine the
fundamental notions of probability and statistics, crucial for data analysis.
More specifically, the final chapter illustrates how chance can be exploited
to conduct experiments through simulations.
To achieve the goal of mastering the application of mathematical results,
demonstrations are presented whenever they are accessible to the reader,
who is assumed to be familiar with basic knowledge. In some cases, the

validity of the results is trusted, while pointing out that detailed
demonstrations can be found in more advanced works.
For each chapter, numerous examples are provided to illustrate the
presented concepts. Generally, these examples are elaborated in detail to
ensure better understanding on the part of the reader.
Finally, for each addressed theme, the choice is made to present them
exhaustively, starting from the initial definitions and hypotheses. These
basic notions will certainly be familiar to many readers. The intention
behind such an approach is to spare those with knowledge gaps the need to
look up these concepts in other literature.
October 2024
OceanofPDF.com

1
The Concept of Logic
CONCEPTS COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER.–
Logic is essential, not only for computer operations, but also for
artificial intelligence. The concepts of logic outlined in this chapter are
therefore of fundamental importance.
Beginning with syllogistic reasoning, the exploration examines
propositional calculus and its fundamental operations: negation,
conjunction, disjunction, conditional, biconditional, as well as their
combinations.
The last section focuses on the tools of deductive reasoning.
References: [EXE 59, MEN 64, QUI 84, WOO 80, LIP 83].
1.1. Syllogisms
Syllogisms are a type of logical reasoning that dates back to the time of
Aristotle in Ancient Greece. They are constructed from logical propositions,
known as premises, which are linked by a conclusion. The conclusions are
derived from the logical of these propositions, allowing the deduction of a
conclusion from the given premises. In what follows, the example of a
classic syllogism will be considered:
i. all men are mortal,
ii. all Greeks are men,
iii. therefore, all Greeks are mortal.
The representation of such a logic is termed “Barbara’s syllogism”, named
after a figure in medieval logic who popularized it. In the above example,

there are two premises and a conclusion. The first premise is represented by
(i), the second by (ii) and the conclusion by (iii).
The described syllogism is considered valid because it respects the rules of
formal logic. The conclusion follows necessarily from the two premises and
cannot be false if the premises are true. Indeed, each premise of a syllogism
must be evaluated according to its truth value to determine whether the
conclusion that follows from it is also true or false. In the example, TRUE
or FALSE (a truth value) can be assigned to each premise; then it is said
that a proposition is a statement which takes one and only one truth value.
EXAMPLE 1.1.–
Some illustrations:
“The sky is blue,”
“Money cannot buy happiness,”
“The house is burning and the firefighters are not there,”
“Computer scientists are all crazy,”
are “propositions”.
“Eat your soup!,”
“Good heavens!”
“Where are they all running?”
do not correspond to propositions.
A syllogism, such as the one considered above, can be represented by the
following notation:
all Xs are Ys (major premise),
all Zs are Xs (minor premise),
so, all Zs are Ys (conclusion).

And especially,
The structure is also known as the “canonical form” of a syllogism. The
terms X, Y and Z represent categories or classes of things (identified
objects), and the syllogism explores the logical relationship between these
categories. The canonical form of a syllogism facilitates highlighting the
logical structure of reasoning and verifying its validity using the rules of
formal logic. Note that a proposition can be placed in one of the following
four categories, as shown in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1. Categories of propositions
A Universal and affirmative e.g. “all men are mortals”
E Universal and negative
e.g. “no man is mortal”
I Particular and affirmative e.g. “some men are mortal”
O Particular and negative
e.g. “some men are not mortal”
Note that a syllogism is composed of three propositions, each belonging to
one of the four classes of propositions (A, E, I and O). The middle term
connects the two premises of the syllogism, and there are four possible
figures depending on the position of this term. The number of possible
categories for a syllogism is 43 = 64 possible combinations (four categories
for each of the three propositions). Furthermore, depending on the position
of X, Y, Z in the premises, there are four classes of syllogisms (see Figure
1.1). The number of categories of syllogisms then becomes 43x4 = 256. For
each possible combination of premises, there are two possible formulations
(A implies B or B implies A), effectively doubling the number of categories
of syllogisms: 512.

Figure 1.1. Syllogism classes
In summary, there are 512 possible categories of syllogisms, but the number
of admissible syllogisms is smaller due to the presence of “rules of
reasoning”.
EXAMPLE 1.2.–
Some illustrations:
A syllogism with two negative premises is not valid. In a valid
syllogism, if one of the two premises is negative, the conclusion
must be negative.
In a valid syllogism, if both premises are affirmative, then the
conclusion must be affirmative.
A syllogism is not valid if it contains two particular premises.
These rules, some of which are presented above, actually reduce the number
of valid forms of syllogisms to 19.
As previously discussed, syllogisms follow a general form:
(premise 1, premise 2) implies (conclusion).
We can generalize and acknowledge that syllogisms can involve more than
two premises, as demonstrated in Lewis Caroll’s “kangaroo argument”.

EXAMPLE 1.3.–
The premises:
1. The only animals in this house are cats.
2. Any animal can become a favorite animal that loves to watch the
moon.
3. When I hate an animal, I avoid it.
4. No animal is carnivorous unless it prowls at night.
5. No cat fails to kill mice.
6. No animal pleases me, except those in this house.
7. Kangaroos cannot become pets.
8. Only carnivores kill mice.
9. I hate animals that I do not like.
10. Animals that roam at night always like to look at the moon.
Conclusion: I always avoid kangaroos.
The objective of the chapter is to provide an overview of the mechanisms
for reasoning based on the manipulation of mathematical concepts.
According to N. Bourbaki (Elements of the History of Mathematics):
We consider that the intervention of metamathematics in the presentation
of logic and mathematics can and must be reduced to the very
elementary part which deals with the handling of operator symbols and
deductive criteria.

1.2. Elementary operations of propositional
calculus
1.2.1. Negation
Consider the following propositions P and Q:
P: Amiens is in France.
Q: it is false that Amiens is in France.
The proposition Q is derived from the proposition P by prefixing the phrase
“it is false that” to it. Q is regarded as the negation of P, denoted as ¬P. The
symbol “¬” represents negation and can thus be interpreted as “it is false
that”. The truth table illustrating negation is simple (see Figure 1.2).
Figure 1.2. Negation truth table
Expressing negation in a literary manner often poses difficulties. While the
previous example, where ¬P translates to “Amiens is not in France” is
straightforward, more complex cases exist. To illustrate such complexity,
consideration will be given to a few examples.
Beginning with the first:

EXAMPLE 1.4.–
P: all integers are real numbers.
Q1: some integers are not real numbers.
Q2: no integer is a real number.
Which of Q1 and Q2 represents the negation of P?
After reflection, it becomes evident that P and Q2 can be false
simultaneously. Thus, Q2 is not the negation of P. Conversely, Q1
represents ¬P.
Here is a second example:

EXAMPLE 1.5.–
P: all angles can be trisected (i.e. divided into three equal parts) using
only the ruler and the compass (notoriously wrong!).
Q1: no angle can be trisected using only the ruler and compass.
Q2: there is at least one angle that cannot be trisected using only the
ruler and compass.
What is the negation of P, Q1 or Q2? P is false because it is impossible
to trisect an angle of 37° with only a ruler and compass.
Q1 is false because we can trisect an angle of 180° with a ruler and
compass (see Figure 1.3).
Figure 1.3. Trisection of an angle of 180°
It is therefore Q2 which is the negation of P.
It should be noted that difficulties often arise when propositions contain
words such as “All,” “Some” or similar expressions. However, as will be
discussed later in this chapter, these difficulties can be resolved by using
quantifiers and the rules associated with them.
1.2.2. Conjunction
A conjunction is a logical connector that combines two propositions to form
a third one, using the word “and” to link clauses. The conjunction of two
propositions P and Q is denoted by P ∧ Q.

EXAMPLE 1.6.–
P: the number 12 is rational.
Q: the number 12 is positive.
P∧Q: the number 12 is rational and positive.
Conjunction is a logical operation that can be represented by a truth table,
as shown in Figure 1.4.
Figure 1.4. Conjunction truth table
It is important to emphasize that the conjunction P ∧ Q is true only if both
propositions P and Q are true. In other words, the conjunction is true only
when both initial propositions are simultaneously true. If either proposition
is false, then the conjunction will be false.
1.2.3. Disjunction
Disjunction is a logical connector that combines two propositions to form a
third, using the word “or” to link clauses. The disjunction of two
propositions P and Q is denoted by P ∨ Q.
EXAMPLE 1.7.–
P: a price reduction is granted to women.
Q: a price reduction is granted to soldiers.
P∨Q: a price reduction is granted to women or soldiers.
By definition, the disjunction truth table is given in Figure 1.5.

Figure 1.5. Disjunction truth table
It is important to emphasize that the disjunction P ∨ Q is false only if both
propositions P and Q are simultaneously false. The disjunction, which is
defined as the inclusive or and is represented by the symbol ∨, comes from
the Latin “vel” and means “either or both”. In other words, if either of the
initial propositions is true, or if both propositions are true, then the
disjunction will be true.
There is another type of “or”, called exclusive or, which comes from the
Latin “aut” and which means “either one or the other”. In the case of the
logical operation of “exclusive or”, the first row of the truth table would be
T, T, F. However, there is no need to create a special symbol for “exclusive
or”, because it can be expressed using the already defined symbols of
conjunction (∧), disjunction (∨) and negation (¬), as shown in Figure 1.6.
Figure 1.6. “Exclusive or” truth table
Therefore, the expression (P ∨ Q) ∧ (¬(P ∧ Q)) represents the “exclusive
or”, where P and Q are two logical propositions. There are other ways of
expressing “exclusive or” using different combinations of conjunction,
disjunction and negation, which will be discussed later.
1.2.4. Conditional
Common language often uses the conditional form: “if P then Q”.

This proposition is an implication constructed from the propositions P and
Q, denoted as P → Q or “if P then Q”. It can be associated with a truth
table, which is, by definition, that of Figure 1.7
Figure 1.7. Conditional truth table
Note that the implication P → Q is always true, except when P is true and Q
is false. In all other cases, the implication is considered true.
EXAMPLE 1.8.–
Consider x and y as angles, along with the following propositions:
P: x and y have their parallel sides.
Q: x = y.
The four rows of the truth table are shown in Figure 1.8.
Figure 1.8. Truth table

EXAMPLE 1.9.–
Consider the following propositions:
P: it is raining.
Q: I will drive you home.
P→Q: if it rains, then I will drive you back.
Note that if P is true (it is raining), this implies that if the proposition Q
(I will drive you home) is false, then the conditional P→Q is false.
Indeed, if P is true and Q is false, this means that although it is raining, I
am not taking you back by car, which contradicts the implication of the
conditional. This situation is “abnormal” and justifies that P→Q is false
in this specific case.
1.2.5. Biconditional
Figure 1.9. Truth table
Let us examine the proposition (P→Q) ∧ (Q→P) whose truth table (see
Figure 1.9) is constructed from the previous truth tables (see Figure 1.7).
This new operation is denoted as P↔Q and is called biconditional. It can be
expressed by “P if and only if Q”.
The biconditional is true if P and Q have the same truth value, and false
otherwise. Therefore, the truth table in Figure 1.10 illustrates this
relationship.

Figure 1.10. Biconditional truth table
By comparing the truth table of the “biconditional” to that of the “exclusive
or”, we can observe that the “exclusive or” can be represented by ¬ (P↔Q).
1.2.6. Tautologies
Given two propositions P and Q, let us examine all the binary operations
that can be considered and draw up the corresponding truth tables (see
Figure 1.11):
The right half of Figure 1.11 is obtained by taking the negation of the
left part.
Table 14 in Figure 1.11 corresponds to a result which is always true;
this is a tautology.
Table 16 corresponds to a result which is always false; this is a
contradiction. The negation of a tautology is a contradiction.

Figure 1.11. Possible binary operations
From the propositions P, Q, …, and the elementary operations ∧, ∨, ¬, it is
possible to construct propositional forms f(P, Q, …). Depending on the
values of P, Q, …, the form can be true or false. If f(P, Q, …) is always true
independently of the truth values of P, Q, …, the form f is a tautology.
Conversely, if f(P, Q, …) is always false independently of the truth values
of P, Q, …, the form f is a contradiction.
The notion of tautology is important in propositional logic because it
simplifies complex logical expressions and verifies the validity of reasoning
by establishing that a proposition is a tautology.

EXAMPLE 1.10–
P∨(¬P), ¬(P∧(¬P)), (¬(P∧Q))↔((¬P)∨(¬Q)) are tautologies. This can
be simply by drawing up the truth tables (see the different truth tables
grouped in Figure 1.12).
The following propositions are contradictions: ¬(P∨(¬P)), P∧(¬P),
(P∧Q)↔((¬P)∨(¬Q)).
The first two are contradictions because they are the negations of the
first two previously presented tautologies. The third proposition can be
verified by setting up a truth table.
Figure 1.12. Representation of the different truth tables
A tautology of the form P↔Q is a logical equivalence. According to the
definition of ↔, this means that P and Q have the same truth tables.
Therefore, it is noted that
Thus, in the previous examples, the logical proposition ¬(P∧Q) is
equivalent to the logical proposition (¬P)∨(¬Q), denoted as ¬(P∧Q) ≡
(¬P)∨(¬Q). It means that these two propositions have the same truth tables
and are therefore logically equivalent.
The following table lists the main basic logical equivalences:

Idempotence
P∨P ≡ P
P∧P ≡ P
Associativity
(P∨Q)∨R ≡ P∨(Q∨R)
(P∧Q)∧R ≡ P∧(Q∧R)
Commutativity
P∨Q ≡ Q∨P
P∧Q ≡ Q∧P
Distributivity
P∨(Q∧R) ≡ (P∨Q)∧(P∨R) P∧(Q∨R) ≡ (P∧Q)∨(P∧R)
Identify
P∨f ≡ P P∧v ≡ P
P∨v ≡ v P∧ f ≡ f
Complementarity P∨(¬P) P∧(¬P) ≡ f
¬v ≡ f ¬f ≡ v
Involution
¬(¬P) ≡ P
Morgan–s laws
¬(P∨Q) ≡ (¬P)∧(¬Q)
¬(P∨Q) ≡ (¬P)∧(¬Q)
In this table, t denotes a tautology and f denotes a contradiction. The table
only shows the symbols ∧, ∨, ¬ which is sufficient since the other symbols
can be expressed in terms of these. Logical equivalences can contain all
symbols.
Note that these equivalences are fundamental in propositional logic and can
be used to simplify complex logical expressions.

EXAMPLE 1.11.–
The equivalence P→Q ≡ (¬P)∨Q is evident. This means that P → Q can
be expressed as (¬P)∨Q using negation and disjunction. This
equivalence is commonly known as the law of implication or law of
detachment (see the truth table shown in Figure 1.13).
Figure 1.13. Truth table
Consequences:
If it rains, I open my umbrella ⇔ It does not rain or I open my
umbrella.
If the triangle is equilateral, it is isosceles ⇔ The triangle is not
equilateral or it is isosceles.
If the man is single, he is unhappy ⇔ The man is not single or he is
unhappy.
Another interesting tautological expression is represented by the form
P→Q. When P→Q holds as a tautology, it signifies that P logically implies
Q, symbolized as P ⇒ Q, indicating that Q holds true whenever P does. This
translates to “If P is true, then Q is also true.” Consequently, if P is false, no
information can be drawn regarding Q. Fundamentally, P can be viewed as
a sufficient condition for Q.

Figure 1.14. Truth table
A syllogism is a specific instance of logical implication. Consider, for
example, the following syllogism (transitivity): P → Q, Q → R, therefore P
→ R which can be represented as follows: ((P→Q)∧(Q→R)) → (P→R).
Examining the truth table in Figure 1.14, it is evident that
(P→Q)∧(Q→R)⇒(P→R).
1.3. Tools of deductive reasoning
In the domain of mathematics, the primary objective is to move from one
true proposition to another through deductive reasoning, leading to a
demonstration. This process is facilitated by employing various tools,
which can be categorized into three main categories:
The replacement rule: this rule permits the substitution of a proposition
with another that is logically equivalent, maintaining the validity of the
demonstration.
The substitution principle: this principle enables the replacement of a
variable with an equivalent expression, preserving the integrity of the
demonstration.
Inference rules: these rules facilitate the derivation from one or more
propositions to a new proposition, employing logical forms such as
implication or contrapositive.

These fundamental tools in mathematics are instrumental in constructing
rigorous and precise demonstrations.
The replacement rule can be formulated as:
REPLACEMENT RULE.
In a tautology, the replacement rule permits the substitution of a
proposition with another having the same truth value.
This is evident because, in a tautology, the truth values of the component
propositions do not determine the truth value of the form, which is
consistently TRUE. Thus, one proposition can be substituted with another
of the same truth value without altering the truth value of the tautology.
Hence, the tautology [(P→(Q→R)]↔[(P∧Q)→R)] transforms, by replacing
R with P, into a new tautology: [(P→(Q→P)]↔[(P∧Q)→P].
The principle of substitution operates differently:
PRINCIPLE OF SUBSTITUTION.–
For a propositional form f (P, Q, …), if P and P' are logically
equivalent, then f(P, Q, …) and f(P', Q, …) are also logically
equivalent, i.e. P ≡ P' ⇒ f(P, Q, …) ≡ f(P', Q, …).
EXAMPLE 1.12.–
Illustrating the principle of substitution with the following example,
consider the propositional form ¬(P∧Q) → P (which is false). Using
Morgan’s law, knowing that ¬(P∧Q) ≡ (¬P)∨(¬Q), hence deducing
(¬P)∨(¬Q)→P.

EXAMPLE 1.13.–
To demonstrate the distinction between the replacement rule and the
substitution principle, Morgan’s law ¬(P∨Q) ≡ (¬P)∧(¬Q) can be
derived from Morgan’s law ¬(P∧Q) ≡ (¬P)∨(¬Q). Begin with the
hypothesis that ¬(P∧Q)↔(¬P)∨(¬Q) is a tautology. Replace P by ¬P:
this simplifies to the tautology ¬((¬P)∧Q)↔(¬(¬P))∨(¬Q). Replacing
Q by ¬Q: this provides the tautology ¬((P)∧(¬Q))↔(¬(¬P))∨(¬(¬Q)).
With ¬(¬P) ≡ P, and ¬(¬Q) ≡ Q, and according to the substitution
principle and the above result, thus ¬((¬P)∧(¬Q)) ≡ P∨Q.
Let us then consider the propositional form ¬(P∨Q). According to the
principle of substitution and the previous line: ¬(P∨Q) ≡
(¬((¬P)∧(¬Q))), or again by substitution ¬(P∨Q) ≡ (¬P)∧(¬Q).
The rules of inference are logical implications listed as follows:
Modus ponens rule: if P is true and (P→Q) is true, then Q is true.
Conjunctive inference rule: if P is true and Q is true, then P∧Q is true.
Conjunctive simplification rule: if P∧Q is true, then P is true.
Hypothetical syllogism rule: if (P→Q) is true and (Q→R) is true, then
(P→R) is true.
Modus tollens rule: if (P→Q) is true and ¬Q is true, then ¬P is true.
Rule of inference by case: if (A→Q) is true and (B→Q) is true, then
(A∨B)→Q is true.
All these rules are easily demonstrated using truth tables.

EXAMPLE 1.14.–
Demonstrations employing truth tables can be found in Figures 1.15–
1.17.
Figure 1.15. Modus ponens
Figure 1.16. Modus tollens
Figure 1.17. Inference by case
1.4. Quantification
Consider the following syllogism:
All men are mortal.
Socrates is a man.

So, Socrates is mortal.
It is practical to use functional symbolism:
H(Socrates) will mean “Socrates is a man.”
M(Socrates) will mean “Socrates is mortal.”
H(x) will mean “x is a man.”
M(x) will mean “x is mortal.”
Consider that for all the values of the variable x, H(x) represents a
proposition that can be either true or false:
H(Napoleon) is true.
H(Eiffel Tower) is false.
H(x) is termed a predicate, specifically monadic as it contains only one
variable.
EXAMPLE 1.15.–
P(x): 2x + 1 = 7
If x = 3, P(x) is true.
If x = 8, P(x) is false.
EXAMPLE 1.16.–
Q(x) : (X+1)2 = X2 + 2X + 1
Q(x) is always true, regardless of the value assigned to X.
In the last example, Q(x) is true for all x. This fact can be expressed using
the universal quantifier ∀x.
∀x Q(x) signifies “for all x, Q(x) holds true”

Using the universal quantifier, the syllogism concerning Socrates can be
expressed as follows:
Another quantifier is the existential quantifier, denoted by ∃, which means
“there is at least one”. Thus, in the context of example 1.15, ∃ x P(x) could
be used to express “there exists at least one x such that 2x + 1 = 7”.
Similarly, the assertion “Some men are intelligent” can be expressed using
predicates:
Here is a suggestion for improvement:
Note the presence of brackets (or parentheses or braces) in the application
of logical quantifiers, indicating their domain of action or scope. By using
the universal (∀) and existential (∃) quantifiers, we can succinctly express
the four categorical forms A, E, I and O of traditional logic. Now, examine
the following predicate: B(x): “x is white”. Suppose the universe of x is
finite, composed of three objects a, b and c for simplicity. In such a
scenario, it becomes straightforward to verify the following equivalences:

[1.1]
[1.2]
Table 1.2. Categories of propositions
A Universal and
affirmative
e.g. all men are intelligent
∀x[H(x)→I(x)]
E Universal and negative e.g. no men is intelligent
∀x[H(x)→¬I(x)]
I Particular and
affirmative
e.g. some men are intelligent ∃x[H(x)∧I(x)]
O Particular and negative e.g. some men are not
intelligent
∃x[H(x)∧¬I(x)]
Having established this equivalence, taking the negation of both sides of
equation [1.1] yields:
or by replacing B by ¬B,
 according to [1.2]
Thus, 
 implies, on the one hand,
 and, on the other hand,
. This demonstrates the process of negating of a
logical expression with a quantifier. Additionally, this result holds true for
any universe
Observing the effect of negation indicates the exchange of the symbols ∀
and ∃. This observation enables us to obtain the negation of propositions
containing “All”, “Some”, “None”, etc.

To illustrate the application of these exchange rules, consider the following
examples:
EXAMPLE 1.17.–
Let P represent the proposition: “all that glitters is not gold”, which can
be expressed as 
, where B(x) denotes that the object
x shines, and O(x) denotes that object x is gold. The negation of P can
be derived by applying the rules of negation and quantifier exchange:
Thus, the negation of P becomes the proposition: “there exists at least
one object which shines, and which is made of gold”. In this case, ¬P
can then be expressed as 
, signifying that some shining
objects are made of gold.
EXAMPLE 1.18.–
Let Q represent the proposition: “the rule applies to everyone”,
expressed as 
, where R(x) denotes that the rule
applies to x. The negation of Q can be derived by applying the rules of
negation and quantifier exchange: 
. Thus, the
negation of Q becomes the proposition: “there exists at least one person
to whom the rule does not apply”. Hence, ¬Q can then be represented as
, indicating that the rule does not apply to certain individuals.

EXAMPLE 1.19.–
Let S represent the proposition: “Every polygon has an exterior and an
interior,” expressed as 
, where P(x) denotes that
object “x” is a polygon, Ι(x) denotes that object “x” has an interior and
Ε(x) denotes that object “x” has an exterior. The negation of S is
formulated as follows:
Thus, ¬S implies that there exist polygons with either no interior or no
exterior.
Consider the expression 
 where, for example, F(x)
represents “x is a saint” and G(x) represents “x is a genius”. It is evident
that there are individuals who are either saints or geniuses, indicating the
existence of individuals who are saints or individuals who are geniuses,
such that:
the generalization to be accepted. Similarly,
1.5. Prenex forms and pure forms
A compound proposition may contain forms such as 
, where P
is a proposition unrelated to the object x and F(x) is a predicate. Clearly, the
scope of the quantifier can be restricted, allowing us to write, for example:
Similarly,

Then, the following deduction can be made:
Nevertheless, the following results are less evident:
Indeed,
, with a similar demonstration for the second result.
A compound proposition can also involve multiple predicates, necessitating
the distinction of several variables. For instance, 
involves two variables, x and y.
Through propositions, predicates, logical operations and quantifiers,
schemas can be formed. These schemas are called monadic if the predicates
contain only one variable:
In a schema, a variable is free if no quantifier applies to it; otherwise, it is
bound. A schema is open if it contains at least one free variable; otherwise,
it is closed. Thus, the schema 
 is closed, as all
variables are linked to a quantifier. Conversely, the schemas
, 
 are open, since the
variable x is free and not bound to a quantifier.
In a schema, quantifiers can be manipulated in two opposing ways:

Broadening the scope of a quantifier leads to a prenex form. For
example, the proposition “
” can be transformed into “
”.
Restricting the scope of a quantifier leads to a pure form. For example,
the proposition “
” can be transformed into “
”.
In both scenarios, the previously defined passing rules can be applied.
However, it is important to note that there are no passing rules for the
biconditional operator (↔). Thus, it becomes necessary to “eliminate”
biconditionals by substituting them with equivalent expressions. Let us
consider the following examples to illustrate the application of the
aforementioned rules:
EXAMPLE 1.20.–
Consider the schema 
, which is
equivalent to
. To prevent ambiguity, this schema is rewritten as follows:
This diagram will be transformed into the prenex form. Using the
passage rules, the successive steps are as follows:
The diagram is thus converted into the prenex form.

EXAMPLE 1.21.–
Consider the schema: 
. After modifying the variable letters for safety, it becomes:
First, the diagram will be converted in the prenex form:
This can be summarized in the following prenex form:
Now, purify the induced schema by:
The last two terms evaluate to “False”, leading to the following
expression:
Therefore, the expression is:
However,
which induces

Finally, the pure form is achieved:
OceanofPDF.com

2
Sets and Relationships
CONCEPTS COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER.–
The assumption is that the basics of set theory are known to the reader.
However, it is deemed appropriate to provide a few reminders, if only to
clarify the vocabulary.
After the reminders relating to sets and their algebra, the discussion will
approach binary relationships, which actually play a major role in the
universe of 0s and 1s.
References: [VEL 19, FAU 73, FAU 79, LIP 83, CON 68].
2.1. Generalities
The primitive terms of set theory are the words element, membership and
set, which are related by the expression
x∈ E or “element x belongs to set E”.
Such an expression is a proposition that takes a True or False value: an
element either belongs or does not belong to a given set (as shown in Figure
2.1).
Figure 2.1. Element, membership, set
A set can be characterized in two different ways:

In extension: by listing all the elements of the set using the braces {}:
for example, E = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} means that set E consists of the
elements 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4.
In comprehension: by defining the set using a property that its
elements must satisfy. The notation uses braces {} with a vertical bar |
to separate the variable from the property. For example,
 means that set E consists of the natural integers
x such that x is strictly less than 5, i.e. E = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}.
Note the use of braces {…} to define a set. The elements inside the braces
can be placed in any order.
Two sets are equal if and only if they contain the same elements: every
element of one set is an element of the other and vice versa (A = B if and
only if for every element x, x belongs to A if and only if x belongs to B):
A set A is a part or subset of a set B if every element of A is also an element
of B (see Figure 2.2). The relationship is denoted as A ⊆ B. If A and B are
different, then A ⊂ B.
Figure 2.2. Inclusion
The equality of two sets A and B can be expressed by:
Let E designate the universal set, containing all the elements under
consideration, and Ø the empty set, which by definition contains no
elements. The following properties can then be easily demonstrated:

∀A, Ø ⊆ A ⊆ E: any set A contains the empty set and is a subset of the
universal set.
∀A, A ⊆ A: any set A is a subset of itself.
(A ⊆ B) ∧ (B ⊆ C) ⇒ A ⊆ C: if A is a subset of B, and B is a subset of
C, then A is a subset of C.

EXAMPLE 2.1.–
Let us illustrate this first wave of definitions with the following
example borrowed from Lewis Caroll. Consider the following four
propositions:
P1: my pans are the only objects I own that are made of pewter.
P2: all your gifts are very useful.
P3: not one of my pans has any use whatsoever.
P: the gifts you gave me are not made of pewter
Let us show that P1 ∧ P2 ∧ P3 → P is a tautology.
Figure 2.3 expresses the situation.
Figure 2.3. Representation of propositions P1, P2, P3
Proposition P1 expresses that the set of pans C contains the set of
pewter objects Σ: Σ ⊂ C.
Proposition P2 expresses that the set of useful objects U contains the set
of gifts Ω: Ω ⊂ U
Finally, proposition P3 expresses that the sets C and U have no common
elements; it follows that Σ and Ω neither. So

which is proposition P.
In example 2.1, the sets Σ and Ω are disjoint. In general, the intersection of
two sets A and B is the set of elements common to A and B (see Figure 2.4):
Two sets are disjoint if their intersection is the empty set, denoted as ∅.
The union of two sets A and B is the set of elements belonging to A or B
(see Figure 2.4)
The complementary Ā of a set A is defined as the set of all elements that do
not belong to A; it is also denoted as CA or CEA or E-A (see Figure 2.4).
Formally, it is written as:
The notation Ā means that Ā is the set of all x such that x does not belong to
the set A.
Figure 2.4. Intersection, union, complementarity
The cardinal of set A, denoted as #A, represents the number of elements
contained in A. If #A is finite, set A is considered finite. Additionally, the
cardinality of the empty set (sometimes denoted by the symbol “∅” or
“{}”) is equal to zero, i.e. #∅ = 0.
The following theorems can be proven:

If A and B are finite sets such that A ∩ B = ∅, then their union A ∪ B
is also finite, and #(A ∪ B) = #A + #B.
If A and B are finite sets, then their union A ∩ B is finite, their
intersection A ∪ B is finite, and #(A ∪ B) = #A + #B - #(A ∪ B).
2.2. Algebra of sets
The operations of union (∪), intersection (∩) and complementarity (−) of
sets have a certain number of properties, defined either by definition or by
deduction. Below are listed these properties:
Idempotence: A ∪ A = A and A ∩ A = A.
Associativity: (A ∪ B) ∪ C = A ∪ (B ∪ C).
Commutativity: A ∪ B = B ∪ A and A ∩ B = B ∩ A.
Distributivity: A∪(B∩C) = (A∪B)∩(A∪C)
Identity: A ∪ ∅ = A  A ∪ E = E  A ∩ ∅ = ∅  A ∩ E = A.
Involution: 
Complementarity: 
Morgan’s laws: 
The following example will be used to illustrate the demonstrations of some
of these operations:

Example 2.2.–
Recalling that the demonstration of Morgan’s first law consists of
showing that for any set of two or more elements A, B, C, etc., the
union of their complements is equivalent to the complement of their
intersection. Let us therefore prove Morgan’s first law on two sets A and
B, where the aim is to show that
Proceeding
with the following steps:
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
2.3. Parts and partitions
Given a set E, we denote by 
 the set of its parts. First of all, it should be
noted that 
 is not empty, because it contains at least the empty set (∅)
and itself (E).

EXAMPLE 2.3.–
Consider the set E = {0, 1, 2, 3}, whose cardinality is #E = 4.
The parts of E are the sets that contain one or more elements of E. Thus,
the parts of E can be classified according to their number of elements:
Parts with 0 elements: ∅.
Parts with 1 element: {0}, {1}, {2}, {3}.
Parts with 2 elements: {0, 1}, {0, 2}, {0, 3}, {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {2, 3}.
Parts with 3 elements: {0, 1, 2}, {1, 2, 3}, {0, 2, 3}, {0, 1, 3}.
The parts with 4 elements: {0, 1, 2, 3}, which is set E itself.
Thus, there are
The number of parts of set E, denoted as 
, is equal to 2 raised to the
power of the cardinal of E, denoted as #E. In this specific case,
The result can be generalized to any finite set (and will be demonstrated
later):
A family of parts of set E, denoted as p(E), is a partition of E if the three
following conditions are verified:
No element of p(E) is empty: 
All the elements of p(E) are pairwise disjoint:

The union of all the elements of p(E) is equal to E: the list of all the
elements of p(E) contains exactly all the elements of E, and no others.
The definition of partition is important in mathematics because it allows a
whole to be broken-down into non-overlapping parts that cover the entire
whole.

EXAMPLE 2.4.–
Figures 2.5–2.8 show some partitions of a given set E.
Figure 2.5. Partition 1
Figure 2.6. Partition 2
Figure 2.7. Partition 3
Figure 2.8. Partition 4

2.4. Cartesian product
A set of two elements {a, b} can be associated with two distinct ordered
pairs: (a, b) and (b, a). In an ordered pair (a, b), the first element is a and
the second element is b. The ordered pairs (a, b) and (b, a) are different, and
the equality of two ordered pairs is defined as follows:
In general, given two sets A and B, the Cartesian product A × B is defined
as the set of all ordered pairs (x, y) such that the first element x belongs to A
and the second element y belongs to B:
The Cartesian product is an important tool in mathematics for constructing
new sets from existing sets.
EXAMPLE 2.5.–
If A = {0, 1} and B = {+, −, ×, ÷}, then we have:
It is important to note that A × B and B × A are different because their
elements are ordered pairs.
If A = B = E, in this case, set A × B = E × E = E2. The diagonal of E2 is the
set {(x, x) / x ∈ E}. If A and B are finite, then the cardinality of their
Cartesian product A × B is equal to the product of their respective
cardinalities: #(A × B) = #A × #B.
Finally, the notion of the Cartesian product generalizes to n sets, where n is
a non-zero natural number. For n = 3, the Cartesian product is:

For n > 3, a new set is added to the definition using the same idea. The
Cartesian product of n sets A1, A2, …, An is defined as the set of all tuples
(x1, x2, …, xn) such that xi belongs to Ai for all i from 1 to n:
Note that, if all the sets A1, A2, … An are finite, then the cardinality of the
Cartesian product is given by:
2.5. Binary relationships
Consider two sets A and B and their Cartesian product A × B. Given a pair
(a,b) ∈ A × B, a relationship ℛ between the elements of A and the elements
of B can be defined as follows:
If the proposition aℛb is true, then a is related to b through R.
If the proposition aℛb is false, then a is not related to b by ℛ.
Figure 2.9. ℛ relationship graph
In all cases, ℛ is a binary relationship between A and B. Representing the
relationships between the elements of A and B by arrows (see Figure 2.9)
yields a graph of the relationship.

EXAMPLE 2.6.–
Some illustrations.
Inclusion expresses a relationship between parts of the same set: for any
set E, if A and B are subsets of E, then:
The expression “is married to” throughout a human community denotes
a binary relationship. Within a human community, if h and f represent
two individuals, a binary relationship ℛ (“is married to”) between them
can be defined such that
hℛf if and only if h is married to f.
In the set of real numbers, ℛ, the notations < or ≥ correspond to a
binary relationship:
In the set ℕ of natural numbers, the relationship ℛ expressing the
integer division denoted by “|” expresses a binary relationship:
 is true or false (“|” means divide).
The graph of ℛ is defined as a subset R of the Cartesian product A × B. This
subset perfectly defines the relationship ℛ, hence the common practice of
using the same name for both.

EXAMPLE 2.7.–
The relationship ℛ is defined by the expression ℛ ⊆ A × B, which
indicates that it is a subset of the Cartesian product A × B, as shown in
Figure 2.10.
Figure 2.10. ℛ relationship graph
For a given binary relationship ℛ, its inverse relationship ℛ–1 is defined by
reversing the direction of the arrows in the graph of the relationship ℛ, as
shown on the right in Figure 2.11.
Figure 2.11. Reverse of R
Consider two relationships ℛ and , which are subsets of E × F and F x G,
respectively (see Figure 2.12). An element x of E and an element z of G are
linked by a relationship  if there exists an element y of F such that x ℛ y
and y z.
 is denoted as oℛ (note the order of writing), and  is referred to as the
composite of ℛ and .

Figure 2.12. Composition of relationships.
2.6. Properties of relationships
Three properties can characterize binary relationships: reflexivity,
symmetry and transitivity.
Reflexivity: for a binary relationship ℛ in E2, ℛ is reflexive if and only if
It follows that if ℛ is reflexive, it must contain the diagonal of E2, as shown
in Figure 2.13.
Figure 2.13. Reflexivity and non-reflexivity
EXAMPLE 2.8.–
Let ℛ be the binary relationship on E = ℕ defined by: “having the same
parity as≵. Thus, the pairs (0,0), (1,1), (2,2), … are part of ℛ.
Additionally, ℛ is a reflexive relationship.

EXAMPLE 2.9.–
Let ℛ be the binary relationship on E = ℛ defined by: “have as square”.
So, (0,0) and (1,1) are part of ℛ, but (2,2) is not. It can be deduced that
ℛ is not a reflexive relationship.
It is easy to determine whether a relationship ℛ on a set E is reflexive by
examining its graph. Indeed, if ℛ is reflexive, there will be a loop on each
point of the graph. Figure 2.14 displays the graph of a reflexive
relationship.
Figure 2.14. Reflexivity
Symmetry: a relationship ℛ on E2 is symmetric if and only if
Antisymmetry: a relationship ℛ on E2 is antisymmetric if and only if
Figure 2.15 shows examples of binary relationships on a set E and their
symmetry and antisymmetry properties.

Figure 2.15. Symmetry and antisymmetry
EXAMPLE 2.10.–
ℛ: “have the same parity as”, E = ℕ, ℛ is symmetric. Thus (2,8),
(8,2)∈ ℛ, (3,7), (7,3) ∈ ℛ.
EXAMPLE 2.11.–
ℛ: “have as square”, E = ℕ, ℛ is antisymmetric as can be noted on all
elements x ≠ y. Thus (2,4)∈ ℛ but (4,2) ∈ ℛ.
EXAMPLE 2.12.–
ℛ: “less than or equal”, the symbol ℛ = “≤ ”, E = ℕ, ℛ is
antisymmetric. Thus, (2,4) ∈ ℛ, but (4,2) ∉ ℛ, since we can write 2 ≤
4, but not 4 ≤ 2.

EXAMPLE 2.13.
ℛ: “⇒”, E = set of propositions. In general, if P and Q belong to the set
of propositions E, the implication of P to Q (P ⇒ Q) does not logically
imply the implication of Q to P (Q ⇒ P), which shows that the
relationship ℛ represented by the symbol “⇒” is not symmetric.
Graphs allow us to determine whether a relationship is symmetric,
asymmetric (not symmetric) or antisymmetric (see Figure 2.16).
Figure 2.16. Symmetry, antisymmetry
Transitivity: the transitivity of a relationship ℛ in set E2 is characterized by
the following property: ℛ is transitive if and only if, for any triplet (x, y, z)
of elements of E2 such that x is in relationship ℛ with y and y is in
relationship ℛ with z, then x is in relationship ℛ with z. In other words, the
following logical implication is verified:
Figure 2.17 shows two examples of relationships, one being transitive and
the other not.

Figure 2.17. Transitivity
EXAMPLE 2.14.–
Let ℛ be a relationship defined on set E of integers ℕ, representing the
relationship: “have the same parity as”.
The relationship ℛ is transitive, meaning that for any triplet of integers
(x, y, z) such that x is in relationship ℛ with y and y is in relationship ℛ
with z, then x is in relationship ℛ with z. Thus, given that (2, 8) ∈ ℛ,
(8, 12) ∈ ℛ and (2, 12) ∈ ℛ, it follows that the relationship ℛ is indeed
transitive.
EXAMPLE 2.15.–
Non-transitivity. Let ℛ be a relationship defined on set E of integers ℕ,
representing the relationship: “have as square”. Although (2, 4) and (4,
16) belong to ℛ, it is evident that (2, 16) does not belong to ℛ,
indicating that the relationship ℛ is not transitive.

EXAMPLE 2.16.–
Transitivity. Let ℛ be a relation defined on set E of integers ℕ,
representing the relationship ℛ: “to be greater than or equal to”
(denoted by “≥”). It is known that if x is in relationship ℛ with y (x ≥ y)
and y is in relationship ℛ with z (x ≥ z), then x is in relationship ℛ with
z (x ≥ z). Thus, the relationship ℛ is transitive.
A relationship ℛ defined on a set E is an equivalence relationship if it
satisfies the following three properties:
ℛ is reflexive: for any element x of E, x is in relationship ℛ with itself
(noted x ℛ x).
ℛ is symmetric: for any element x and y of E, if x is in relationship ℛ
with y (x ℛ y), then y is in relationship ℛ with x (y ℛ x).
ℛ is transitive: for any triplet (x, y, z) of elements of E such that x is in
relationship ℛ with y and y is in relationship ℛ with z, then x is in
relationship ℛ with z.
For a relationship ℛ which is an equivalence relation, sometimes the
notation x ≡ y (mod ℛ) is used instead of x ℛ y to indicate that the elements
x and y are equivalent according to the relationship ℛ.
EXAMPLE 2.17.–
Equivalence relationship. Let ℛ be defined on set E of real numbers ℕ,
representing the equality relationship (denoted by “=”). The following
properties hold: ℛ is reflexive because every real number x is equal to
itself (x = x). ℛ is symmetric because for any pair of real numbers x and
y, if x is equal to y (x = y), then y is equal to x (y = x). ℛ is transitive
because for any triple of real numbers x, y and z, if x is equal to y (x = y)
and y is equal to z (y = z), then x is equal to z (x = z). Thus, the
relationship ℛ is an equivalence relationship.

EXAMPLE 2.18.–
Equivalence relationship. Let the relationship ℛ be defined on set E of
lines in space, representing the parallelism relationship (denoted by
“⫽”). The following properties hold: ℛ is reflexive because every line D
is parallel to itself (D ⫽ D). R is symmetric because for any pair of lines
D and D', if D is parallel to D' (D ⫽ D'), then D' is also parallel to D (D' ⫽
D). ℛ is transitive because for any triplet of lines D, D' and D", if D is
parallel to D' (D ⫽ D') and D' is parallel to D" (D' ⫽ D"), then D is also
parallel to D" (D ⫽ D"). Thus, ℛ is an equivalence relationship.
Given an equivalence relationship ℛ on set E, the equivalence class of the
element a of E, denoted as å, is the set of all the elements of E which are in
relationship with a according to ℛ. In other words, the equivalence class å
is defined as follows:
Using modular notation, it can also be written as:
which is the equivalence relationship defined by R.
The equivalence classes are parts of set E, constituting a partition of E. This
is evident because
For any element a of E, the corresponding equivalence class, denoted
as å, is non-empty because it contains at least the element a (a∈ å).
E = ∪aå (obvious).
The equivalence classes are disjoint: if x belongs to two different
equivalence classes å and å', then å = å' (if x∈ å and x∈ å', then å =
å').
Conversely, any partition of E corresponds to an equivalence relationship.
The relationship ℛ: “belongs to the same class as” is reflexive, symmetric
and transitive, thereby defining an equivalence relationship. The set of

equivalence classes of E for a relationship ℛ is called the quotient set E∕ℛ.
Such a set is itself a set whose elements are the equivalence classes of E.
For example, if E is the set of relative integers and ℛ is the equivalence
relationship defined by “x and y have the same remainder in division by 3”,
then the quotient set E∕ ℛ contains three elements:
the class of integers which have a remainder of 0 in division by 3;
the class of integers which have a remainder of 1;
the class of integers which have a remainder of 2.
Figure 2.18 shows the set of equivalence classes of E for a relationship ℛ
(partition of E), called the quotient set E∕ℛ:
E∕ℛ = {A, B, C}
Figure 2.18. Equivalence classes
A relationship ℛ defined on a set E is a (partial) order relation if the
following conditions hold:
ℛ is reflexive: ∀x ∈ E, x ℛ x.
ℛ is antisymmetric: ∀x, y ∈ E, if x ℛy and y ℛ x, then x = y.
ℛ is transitive: ∀x, y, z ∈ E, if x ℛ y and y ℛ z, then x ℛ z.
A total order relationship, in addition to these conditions, must also satisfy
the property ℛ is total: ∀x, y ∈ E, x ℛ y or y ℛ x.
A partial order relationship defines a preorder structure on E, while a total
order relationship defines a total order structure.

EXAMPLE 2.19.–
Let E = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12} and the relationship ℛ
defined on E by “divides” or “|”. ℛ is an order relationship on E
because it satisfies the following three properties: ℛ is reflexive
because every element of E divides itself, i.e. for all x in E, x|x; ℛ is
antisymmetric because if x|y and y|x, then x = y, i.e. if x and y are two
divisors of each other, they must be equal; ℛ is transitive because if x|y
and y|z, then x|z, i.e. if x divides y and y divides z, then x divides z.
Figure 2.19 shows the relationship ℛ: each point represents the division
relationship between two numbers (the point (3, 6) means 3|6). It is
evident that ℛ satisfies the three properties of the order relationship,
and therefore it is indeed an order relationship on E.
Figure 2.19. Order relationship

EXAMPLE 2.20.–
Let E be the set of towns located on a given river and ℛ be the
relationship “is downstream of”. ℛ is an order relationship on E,
because it satisfies the following properties: ℛ is reflexive: each city is
downstream of itself; ℛ is antisymmetric: if a city A is downstream of
B, then B is not downstream of A; ℛ is transitive: if a city A is
downstream from a city B, and B is downstream from a city C, then A is
downstream from C.
An order can be total if there exists a comparison relationship between all
the elements of E. Otherwise, the order is said to be partial (see Figure
2.20).
Figure 2.20. Partial order, total order
EXAMPLE 2.21.–
“⊂” defines a partial order on a set of sets. If E is the set of finite sets of
natural integers, the relationship “inclusion” or “⊂” is a partial order on
E, because “⊂” is reflexive: every set is included in itself, “⊂” is
antisymmetric: if A is included in B and B is included in A, then A = B,
“⊂” is transitive: if A is included in B and B is included in C, then A is
included in C. However, this order is not total, because there are sets
that are not comparable with each other. For example, {1, 2} and {2, 3}
are neither included in each other nor equal.

EXAMPLE 2.22.–
“≥” defines a total order on a set of numbers. For example, if we
consider the numbers 3, 5 and 7, the following total order can be
established: 7 ≥ 5 ≥ 3. This total order facilitates the comparison of
numbers and allows them to be classified hierarchically.
2.7. Applications
Consider a binary relationship f from a set E to a set F. The relationship f is
an application (or function) if for every element x of E, there exists a unique
element y of F such that x is associated with y by the relationship f, which is
generally noted y = f(x) instead of x f y. Then, y is considered the image of x
by the function f or x is considered an antecedent of y by the function f. This
notation facilitates the understanding and manipulation of functions by
associating each element of the starting set E with a unique element of the
arrival set F.
Consider the graphs in Figure 2.21.
Figure 2.21. Applications
By examining the previous graphs (see Figure 2.21), the following is
evident:
The binary relationship f is an application, because each element of the
starting set is associated with a unique element of the ending set.
The binary relationship ℛ1 is not an application, because the element x
of the starting set is not associated with any element of the target set,

meaning it does not have an image.
The binary relationship ℛ2 is not an application, because the element x
of the starting set is associated with two different elements of the target
set, which contradicts the definition of a function that must associate a
unique element of the arrival set to each element of the starting set.
Set E is the domain of definition of the function f, representing the set of
values for which the function is defined and can be evaluated. It is generally
noted as:
Such a notation explicitly specifies the starting set of the function and
facilitates the understanding and manipulation of the function.
A function f from set E to set F is:
surjective if any element of the target set F is the image of at least one
element of the starting set E;
injective if any element of the target set F has at most one image in the
starting set E;
bijective if the function f is both surjective and injective, meaning
every element of the target set F has exactly one image in the starting
set E.
To better understand these definitions, Figure 2.22 graphically shows the
concepts of subjectivity, injectivity and bijectivity of a function.

Figure 2.22. Surjection, injection and bijection
It is important to note that if f is a bijection from set E to set F, then the sets
E and F have the same cardinality. It means that there is a one-to-one
correspondence between the elements of set E and those of set F, implying
that these two sets contain the same number of elements. Such a property is
often used to establish equivalences between different sets and facilitate
calculations in set theory.
Figure 2.23. Composition of two applications.
Consider three sets E, F and G, as well as two applications f from E to F
and g from F to G, as shown in Figure 2.23.
Note that the composition of two functions f and g defines a new function h,
called the composite of f and g. For any element x of set E, the function h(x)
is defined as the image of x by the composition of the functions f and g,
obtained by successively applying f and then g to x. Thus, any element in
set E will have an image in set G via the composite function h. This
operation is noted as:
h = gof
and simplifies the expression of the composition of the functions f and g.

If f is a bijection from set E to set F, it implies the existence of a reciprocal
or inverse application of f, denoted as f−1, which enables the transition from
F to E by reversing the arrows of the graph of f. The function f−1 is also a
bijection, indicating that each element y of F corresponds to a unique
element x of E such that y = f(x) and that each element x of E corresponds to
a unique element y of F such that y = f(x). In other words, if x = f−1(y), then
y = f(x) and vice versa. The reciprocal function f−1 is therefore defined by x
= f−1(y) ⇔ y = f(x).
If I designates the identical application which is defined on a set E by
∀x∈E I(x) = x, we have 
.
Now, let us examine the number of distinct applications from the finite set
A to the finite set B. To answer this question, we can reason from the
diagram in Figure 2.24, where each element of set A is connected to all the
elements of set B.
Figure 2.24. Number of applications from A to B.
To construct a given application f from A to B, we must draw an arrow
starting from a (#B possible choices), then an arrow starting from b (#B
possible choices), then an arrow starting from c (#B possible choices), etc.
In total, there are #A times the product #B.#B….#B. The number of possible
choices is therefore #B#A. Consequently, there are #B#A different
applications from A to B.
Now, consider a set E and a part A of E. Let us define the map φA from E to
B = {0,1} by:
φA(x) = 1 if x∈A;

φA(x) = 0 if x∉A.
as shown in Figure 2.25.
Figure 2.25. Characteristic function
φA is called the characteristic function of A. There are as many distinct
characteristic functions as there are elements in 
. Now, the number of
characteristic functions (functions from E to B) is #B#E, or 2#E.
Consequently, the number of parts of a set E is 2#E, a result previously
announced previously in section 2.3.
OceanofPDF.com

3
Counting and Combinatorial Analysis
CONCEPTS COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER.–
Counting problems are extremely difficult to solve manually.
Computers have proven highly effective in tackling these fundamental
problems, which quickly surpass human calculation capabilities. The
ability to identify and count object pairings falls within the domain of
combinatorial analysis.
Therefore, the examination will successively cover the counting of
permutations, arrangements and combinations. In the latter case, the
properties of binomial coefficients will be detailed. All these counting
formulas involve calculating the factorial function of an integer n. To
address cases where n is very large, an approximate formula, known as
Stirling’s formula, will be presented along with a detailed
demonstration.
References: [VEL 19, ENG 76, COC 19].
3.1. Set cardinals
The counting problem involves finding the number of elements in a finite
set. The number is called the cardinal of the set and is denoted by #E for a
set E.
Consider the fundamental operations of set algebra (see Figure 3.1). The
following propositions can be easily proved using the basic definitions and
properties of set algebra:

Figure 3.1. Fundamental operations
For any sets A and B: #(A ∪ B) = #A + #B − #(A ∩ B)
Special case: if A and B are disjoint, then #(A ∪ B) = #A + #B.
For arbitrary sets A and B: #(A − B) = #A − #(A ∩ B).
If B is included in A(B ⊆ A): #(A− B) = #A − #B.
If A1, A2, …, An is a partition of A: #A = #A1 + #A2 + … + #An.
For finite sets A and B: #(A×B) = #A.#B.
For finite sets A1, A2, …, An #(A1×A2 × … ×An) = #A1.#A2. … .#An.
In particular, if A is a finite set: #(An) = (#An).
The following results were also presented in a previous chapter:
For a set A of cardinal n, we have: #A = n. Let 
 be the set of parts
of A; then 
.
For a set A of cardinal n, the number of parts of k elements of A is
given by:
Throughout this chapter, unless specified otherwise, only finite sets will be
considered.
3.2. Permutations, arrangements,
combinations
Let E be a set of cardinal n (composed of n elements).

DEFINITION.–
A permutation of E is an ordered list of its elements: the first, the
second, …, the n-th.
Consider the set E = {1, 2, 3, 4}. The list (4, 2, 3, 1) is a permutation of E.
To find the number of permutations Pn of a set with n elements, the method
is as follows:
Choose the first element: there are n possibilities.
Choose the second element: there are n–1 possibilities since one
element has already been chosen.
Choose the third element: there are n–2 possibilities since two
elements have already been chosen.
Continue with such process until the choice of the n-th and last
element, for which there remains only one possibility.
The total number of permutations of the set E is therefore given by the
product of the numbers of possibilities at each step, i.e.:
Therefore, we have
Pn = n!
EXAMPLE 3.1.–
Consider a deck of 52 cards, all distinct. The number of possible
permutations of the cards is 52!, an extremely large number of the order
of 8.1067. On the contrary, if only the 4 aces of the deck of cards are
considered, the number of permutations is smaller: it is equal to 4!= 24.

DEFINITION.–
An ordered list of k distinct elements chosen from a set of elements n is
called an arrangement.
Note 
 as the number of arrangements of k elements taken in n elements.
An element taken by itself is an arrangement of 1 element among n. There
are obviously n arrangements of this type, therefore 
.
To obtain the arrangements of 2 elements among n elements, simply take
each arrangement with 1 element and add one of the n-1 remaining
elements to it. Thus, the number of arrangements of 2 elements among n
elements is 
. Continuing this reasoning, the number of
arrangements of k elements among n elements is given by the formula
… . 
.
EXAMPLE 3.2.–
In a horse race with n = 20 horses, the number of trifectas in order (i.e.
the number of ways to rank three horses in order first, second and third)
is given by the number of arrangements of k = 3 elements among 20, i.e.
.
Returning to the problem of choosing k elements from n elements, but this
time without taking into account the order.
DEFINITION.–
A combination of k elements taken from n without repetition is a subset
of k elements of the set of n elements.
Note 
 as the number of combinations of k elements taken from n
elements. In other words, a combination is a selection of k elements from n

elements where the order does not matter. The number of combinations 
can be calculated using the number of arrangements 
 because each
combination of k elements corresponds to k! different arrangements.
Therefore,
EXAMPLE 3.3.–
Returning to the example of horse racing with n = 20 horses, the
number of combinations of k = 3 horses that can be formed is given by
the formula:
or
Therefore, a trifecta out of order brings in less than a trifecta in order
because the number of combinations of three horses out of orders is
greater than the number of permutations of three horses in order
(typically six times more).
From the previous relationships, we can establish the following
relationship:
The coefficients 
 are called binomial coefficients because of their
connection to the expansion of Newton's binomial. These coefficients are
also noted as:

3.3. Properties of binomial coefficients
Given the relationship that defines it, the binomial coefficient 
 has the
following immediate properties.
PROPERTY 3.1.–
The binomial coefficient 
 has the immediate property of symmetry:
Special cases: 
.
The following property holds:
PROPERTY 3.2.–
The binomial coefficient 
 has the following property, known as
Pascal’s:
Indeed, expanding the sum 
 by replacing each binomial
coefficient with its expression:

The above result forms the basis of the famous Pascal's triangle (see Figure
3.2).
Figure 3.2. Pascal’s triangle
The name of the binomial coefficient comes from Newton’s binomial, a
formula given by Isaac Newton which is a remarkable identity.
NEWTON’S BINOMIAL FORMULA.–
The result can be proven by induction. First of all,

The formula is true for n = 0, 1, 2. Suppose it is true for n > 2. So, for n + 1
Evaluate each of the two sums:
Therefore,

According to property 3.2, the following result holds:
which proves the development of Newton’s binomial.
An immediate application of Newton’s binomial formula leads to the
following property.
PROPERTY 3.3.–
Indeed, by replacing x = y = 1 in the above formula (property 3.3), the
following holds:

This property is often called Vandermonde identity. Note that this property
is not new because the sum of the binomial coefficients represents the
number of parts of a set with n elements, which is equal to 2n. Furthermore,
this relationship can be “read” directly on Pascal’s triangle. Indeed, taking
for example the line for n = 5 (see Figure 3.1), the sum of the binomial
coefficients is 1 + 5 + 10 + 10 + 5 + 1 = 32 = 25.
3.4. Stirling’s formula
As seen, combinatorial calculation primarily involves the factorial n!. The
value of this factorial increases drastically with n, and it is convenient to
use an approximate expression that allows a simpler calculation. This
expression is given by Stirling’s formula (also due to Moivre).
STIRLING’S FORMULA
Although the formula is valid for n →∞ it provides an approximate value of
n! for large values of n, as shown in the table in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3. Comparison between n! and the value of Stirling
To demonstrate this magnificent formula, some intermediate results are
needed.
The calculation is a bit long, but it offers a good analytical exercise.
First of all, consider the sequence defined by

The expression in square brackets is derived from the formula to be
demonstrated. For n →∞, we should find 
. Demonstrating that this
sequence is bounded both lower and upper involves considering the integral
calculation based on the trapezoid method. Figure 3.4 shows the function y
= ln(x) between the values x = k and x = k + 1.
Figure 3.4. Trapezoid method
Also, consider the abscissa point 
, along with the tangents to the
curve at A (abscissa x = k) and B (abscissa x = k + 1). The equations of the
two tangents are:
with C being the midpoint of AB, the vertical line WC intersects the tangent
at A at D and the tangent at B at E. Since the curve y = ln(x) is concave,
points D and E lie above C. The coordinates of D and E are:

The area bounded by the curve y = ln(x), the abscissa axis, and the straight
lines x = k and x = k + 1, is smaller than the sum of the areas of the
trapezoids ADWU and EBVW, on the one hand, and greater than the area of
the trapezoid ABVU, on the other hand, i.e.:
However,
Therefore,
Now, integrate ln(x) from 1 to n, which corresponds over k from 1 to n − 1
on both sides:

Therefore,
From this, we can deduce
Hence, by rearranging the terms
By noting that

The double inequality is written as 
 for
.
The sequence un is therefore limited. But this sequence is decreasing. In
fact, calculate un+1 − un. A fairly easy calculation shows that:
The function f(x) for x ∈[1,∞[ is decreasing because its derivative is
negative:
Since 
 and f(x)→0 f or x → ∞ f(x) > 0 on[1,∞[.
So un+1 − un <0. The sequence un is decreasing and bounded by 7/8. It
therefore tends towards a limit λ ∈]7/8,1[when n → ∞, and we therefore
have at the limit:
To obtain Stirling’s formula, we now need to calculate K. For this, the
following Wallis integral is used:

The first Wallis integrals are (easy calculation) 
 and I1 = 1. All Wallis
integrals can be calculated from I0 and I1 Indeed,
Hence, the recurrence relationship is
To continue the calculation, it is necessary to distinguish between n even
and n being odd. So,
However,

so that:
An analogous calculation, not detailed here, yields for n odd,
We will use these relations to obtain K. When n → ∞,
It can be deduced that:
The sequence In is decreasing. Indeed,
However, for x ∈[0,π/2], cos(x)−1 ≤ 0 and cosn(x) ≥ 0. Therefore, cosn(x)
[cos(x) − 1] ≤ 0.
The integral will therefore be negative, which demonstrates that In is a
decreasing sequence. Thus,

using the recurrence relation between In and In+2.
For n → ∞, the previous relationship leads to In ≤ In+1 ≤ In, which signifies
that In+1∼In and, in particular, I2p+1∼I2p.
Taking into account the previous result giving I2p+1 and I2p as a function of
K, it follows that
Therefore, the result that was missing to obtain Stirling’s formula is now
obtained.
OceanofPDF.com

4
Boolean Algebra and Boolean Functions
CONCEPTS COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER.–
The computer universe is Boolean: it only handles 0s or 1s (at least in
current computers). The construction of computers is based on logic
circuits, which will be explained in the next chapter. Before this, it is
appropriate to recall the mathematics relating to Boolean functions.
The notion of ordered sets with their particular elements will be
approached, leading to lattices and Boolean algebras. Next, Boolean
functions will be explained in detail.
References: [VEL 19, FAU 79, LIP 83].
4.1. Special elements of an ordered set
Let E be a set on which an order relation is defined, denoted by ∠. E is
termed an ordered set. From the definition, the relation ∠ has the properties
of reflexivity, antisymmetry and transitivity.
Figure 4.1. Hasse diagram
Practically, when representing a relationship by its graph, if it is an order
relation, simplification involves removing:

loops (for reflexivity);
arrows representing transitivities.
Then a Hasse diagram is obtained, as shown in Figure 4.1. Note that a
Hasse diagram displays at most a single arrow between two elements.
EXAMPLE 4.1.–
Consider the set E = (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and the relationship “≥”.
Figure 4.2 shows the corresponding Hasse diagram.
Figure 4.2. Hasse diagram
EXAMPLE 4.2.–
Consider the set E of positive integer divisors of 30, i.e. E = (1, 2, 3, 5,
6, 10, 15, 30}. The relationship is “divided”. The Hasse diagram for this
relationship is shown in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3. Hasse diagram
Now, consider a subset P of E. Here are some definitions relating to special
elements of E.

DEFINITION 4.1.–
Upper bound and lower bound
An upper bound of P is any element a of E such that x∈P precedes a:
∀x∈P x ∠ a.
A lower bound of P is any element b of E such that for every x in P, b
precedes x: ∀x∈P b ∠ x.

EXAMPLE 4.3.–
Consider the set E = {1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 10, 15, 30} and the relationship
“divides”. If P = {2, 3, 5, 10}, there exists a single upper bound, 30, and
a single lower bound, 1 (as shown in Figure 4.4).
Figure 4.4. P = {2, 3, 5, 10}.
Figure 4.5. P = {2, 3, 5, 10}.
If P = (2, 5, 10}, there are two upper bounds, 10 and 30, and a single lower
bound, 1 (as shown in Figure 4.5).

DEFINITION 4.2.–
Maximal element and minimal element
An element a of P is a maximal element of P if there is no element of P
strictly greater than a: a ∈ P,∀x ∈ P, ¬(a ∠ x).
An element b of P is a minimal element of P if there is no element of P
strictly less than b: b ∈ P,∀x ∈ P, ¬(x ∠ b).

EXAMPLE 4.4.–
Let E = {1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 10, 15, 30} and consider the relationship
“divides”.
Figure 4.6. P = {2, 3, 5, 10}.
Figure 4.7. P = {2, 5, 10}.
If P = {2, 3, 5, 10}, there is a single maximal element, 10, and three
minimal elements, 2, 3 and 5 (as shown in Figure 4.6).
If P = {2, 5, 10}, there is a single maximal element, 10, and two
minimal elements, 2 and 5 (as shown in Figure 4.7).

DEFINITION 4.3.–
Largest element/smallest element
The largest element (le) of P is the element a of P such that a ∈ P, ∀x
P, x ∠a.
The smallest element (se) of P is the element b of P such that b ∈ P, ∀x
∈ P, b ∠x.
EXAMPLE 4.5.–
Let E = {1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 10, 15, 30} and consider the relationship
“divides”.
If P = {2, 3, 5, 10}, there is neither le nor se in this set.
If P = {2, 5, 10}, the le of P is 10, and there is no se in this set.
DEFINITION 4.4.–
Least upper bound/greatest lower bound
The least upper bound, LUB(P), of P is the smallest element among the
upper bounds of P, if it exists. In other words, LUB(P) is the se of the
set of upper bounds of P.
The greatest lower bound GLB(P) of P is the largest element among the
lower bounds of P, if it exists. In other words, GLB(P) is the le of the
set of lower bounds of P.

EXAMPLE 4.6.–
Let E = {1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 10, 15, 30} and consider the relationship
“divides”.
If P = {1, 3, 5, 30}, then the set of upper bounds of P is {30} and the set
of lower bounds of P is {1}. Thus, the least upper bound of P is LUB(P)
= 30 and the greatest lower bound of P is GLB(P) = 1.
If P = {2,5,10}, then the set of upper bounds of P is 10 and the set of
lower bounds of P is {1}. Thus, the least upper bound of P is LUB(P) =
10 and the greatest lower bound of P is GLB(P) = 1.
NOTE.–
The least upper bound LUB(P) (respectively greatest lower bound,
GLB(P)) does not always exist because it is possible that the set of
upper bounds (respectively lower bounds) of P does not have a (se)
(respectively (le)).
DEFINITION 4.5.–
The universal element of E is the largest element (le) of E; the null
element of E is the smallest element (se) of E.
EXAMPLE 4.4.–
Consider the set E = {1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 10, 15, 30} with the relationship
“divides”. Then, 30 is the universal element of E, meaning that any
element of E divides 30. Similarly, 1 is the null element of E, as it is
divisible by all the elements of E.

4.2. Lattice
A lattice is an ordered set E such that for any pair of elements x and y of E,
there exists a least upper bound (LUB (x, y)) and a greatest lower bound
(GLB (x, y)) of x and y in E. That is, LUB (x, y) is the smallest element of E
which is greater than x and y, and GLB (x, y) is the largest element of E
which is smaller than x and y. Using the Hasse diagram (shown in Figure
4.1), we can easily visualize the order relationships between the elements of
E and determine whether E is a lattice or not. The Hasse diagram is a
graphical means of representing the partial order between the elements of
an ordered set: each element is represented by a point and each arrow
connects the elements that are related by the order relationship. If the Hasse
diagram satisfies the properties of the definition of a lattice, then the
ordered set is a lattice.

EXAMPLE 4.8.–
Figure 4.8 shows Hasse diagrams of ordered sets.
Figure 4.8. Where are the lattices?
[1] is not a lattice because the subset {a, b} has no upper bound. [3] is
not a lattice because the subset {a, b} has only one upper bound, c (it is
the (se), therefore LUB{a, b} = c), but it has three lower bounds d, e and
f, and {d, e, f} has no (le). [5] is not a lattice because the part {a, b} has
no upper bound. On the contrary, [2], [4], [6], [7], [8] are lattices. In
these cases, the null element is n and the universal element is u.
NOTE.–
If the order is total, E is a lattice. Indeed, in this case, all the elements
are comparable two by two, and therefore for any pair of elements, there
exists an LUB and a GLB. We can therefore find the le and se necessary
to determine whether E is a lattice.

A lattice can be redefined algebraically by setting:
The least upper and greatest lower bounds are thus defined as the result of
operations that verify the following properties:
idempotence: x∇x = x, xΔx = x;
associativity: x∇(y∇z) = (x∇y)∇z, xΔ(yΔz) = (xΔy)Δz;
commutativity: x∇y = y∇x, xΔy = yΔx;
identity: x∇u = u∇x = u, xΔn = nΔx = n, where n and u denote,
respectively, the null element and the universal element.
The whole E can be considered structured by the laws ∇ and Δ, obtaining
the algebraic definition of a lattice while disregarding the order relationship.
The preceding properties are then accepted as axioms, and the two
definitions are equivalent.
A lattice can have additional properties:
A lattice E is complemented if for every element x of E, there exists a
complement  such that x∇ = u and xΔ  = n:
There can be several complements for the same element x.
A lattice is distributive if for any triplet of elements x, y and z of E, the
following holds:
These additional properties are significant in the study of lattices as they
help characterize certain types of lattices and establish results on their
structure. For example, any distributive lattice is complemented, but the

converse is not always true. In other words, there exist complemented
lattices that are not distributive.
EXAMPLE 4.9.–
The lattice [2] shown in Figure 4.8 is both distributive and
complemented.
Indeed, for any element x of E, there exists a complement  such that
xΔ  = n and x∇ = u. For example, for the element a, its complement is
 = f, because aΔf = n and a∇ f = u.
Furthermore, it can be verified that this lattice is distributive using the
operations ∇ and Δ defined on the elements of E. For example, for the
elements a, b and c of E, the following holds:
and for the elements a, b and d of E, the following holds:
These two equalities verify the distribution condition, which confirms
that the lattice [2] is indeed distributive.
4.3. Boolean algebra
DEFINITION 4.6.–
A Boolean algebra E is a distributive and complemented lattice.
IMMEDIATE PROPERTY.–
In a Boolean algebra, for each element x, there exists a unique
complement denoted by .

Proof: let y1 and y2 be two complements of x, any element of E. By
definition, x∇y1 = u, xΔy1 = n, x∇y2 = u, xΔy2 = n. Now (x∇y1)Δy2 = uΔy2 =
y2 and (xΔy1)Δy2 = (xΔy2)∇(y1Δy2) = u∇(y1Δy2) = y1Δy2 by distributivity. It
implies that y2 = y1Δy2 and by symmetry y1 = y2Δy1. According to
commutativity, y1 = y2, showing that x has a unique complement.
Finally, the algebraic properties of a Boolean algebra are given below.
Idempotence: x∇x = x  xΔx = x.
Associativity: x∇(y∇z) = (x∇y)∇z  xΔ(yΔz) = (xΔy)Δz.
Commutativity: x∇y = y∇x xΔy = yΔx.
Identity: x∇n = x x∇u = u xΔn = n xΔu = x.
Distributivity: x∇(yΔz) = (x∇y)Δ(x∇z) xΔ(y∇z) = (xΔy)∇(xΔz).
Complementarity: x∇ = u xΔ  = n  = u 
 = n.
Involution: = x.
Morgan’s laws: 
These properties can be used to define Boolean algebra formally. It is worth
noting that these properties have already been encountered twice:
In propositional calculus, where propositional variables can be
interpreted as elements of a Boolean algebra.
In the algebra of subsets of a set, where union, intersection and
complement operations are examples of binary operations on a set that
satisfy the properties of Boolean algebras.

Figure 4.9. Correspondence between E, V, 
Generalizing these examples, Boolean algebras can be seen as abstract
algebraic systems that obey these properties. This approach enables the
formal definition of Boolean algebras, without referencing particular
examples. Figure 4.9 shows the correspondences between the algebraic
properties of a Boolean algebra and the operations on the sets V of
propositions or on the parts 
 of a set E. Thus, it can be stated that the set
V and the set 
 have a Boolean algebra structure.
Stone’s theorem (1934) expresses several interesting results about finite
Boolean algebras. Admitting this theorem, it can be formulated in three
steps:
STONE’S THEOREM.–
The Hasse diagram of a finite Boolean algebra is always an n-cube
for a certain n (suitably chosen).
Two finite Boolean algebras having the same number of elements
have isomorphic (identical) Hasse diagrams.
The number of elements of a finite Boolean algebra can only be 2n
for a certain integer n.

EXAMPLE 4.10.–
Consider the set E of divisors of 110, given by E ={1, 2, 5, 10, 11, 22,
55, 110}. This set contains eight items.
Two binary operations are defined on E:
x∇y = LCM(x, y) (the LCM of x and y is the lowest common multiple of
x and y) and xΔy = GCD (x, y) (the GCD of x and y is the greatest
common divisor of x and y).
These laws correspond to the “divides” order relation. The truth tables
of these twolaws are presented in the table in Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10. Truth tables
Thus, n = 1 and u = 110, implying that the Hasse diagram is the 3-cube
shown in Figure 4.11.

Figure 4.11. Hasse diagram

EXAMPLE 4.11.–
Consider the set Σ = {a, b, c}. All parts of Σ is denoted by 
 = {∅,a,
b, c, {a, b}, {a, c), {b, c}, Σ}, where ∅ is the empty set, and {a), {b},
{c}, {a, b}, {a, c}, {b, c} and Σ are the sets containing, respectively, a
single element of Σ, two elements of Σ and Σ itself (see Figure 4.12).
The set 
 is ordered by the relationship ⊆, which expresses the
inclusion between the sets.
Figure 4.12. Inclusions
The truth tables of the laws ∪, ∩ and “inverse” are shown in Figure
4.13. With n = ∅ and u = Σ, the Hasse diagram becomes a 3-cube, as
shown in Figure 4.14.

Figure 4.13. Truth tables
Figure 4.14. Hasse diagram
4.4. Boolean functions
Consider the set B = {0, 1}, provided with the order relationship ≤. B has a
Boolean algebra structure, where the operations of union and intersection
are, respectively, defined by a∇b = max(a, b) and a∇b = min(a, b).
The truth tables of laws ∇ and Δ and “inverse” as well as the Hasse diagram
are given in Figure 4.15.

Figure 4.15. Truth tables and Hasse diagram
In this particular case, ∇ represents the logical “or” and A the logical “and”.
Let us denote by Bn the set of n-tuples (a1, a2, …, an), where ai ∈ B. This
set contains 2n elements, because each term of an n-tuple can take two
values (0 or 1).
In fact, Bn = B × B × B × … × B (n times), which means that Bn is the
Cartesian product of n copies of the set B :Bn = Bn.
EXAMPLE 4.12.–
Consider the example where n = 3. In this case, B3 is the set of triples
(a, b, c), where a, b and c belong to B. Thus, it can be expressed as:
Expressing it further, B3 is equivalent to B × B × B, implying that it
contains 23 =8 elements in total. Using the notation {0,1} for set B, it
can be illustrated as:
A Boolean function is an application Bn to B.

EXAMPLE 4.13.–
Consider f : B3 → B a Boolean function defined by the truth table
presented in Figure 4.16.
Figure 4.16. Example of a Boolean function
The number of Boolean functions Bn → B can be calculated using the
formula #B#A. In the case where A = Bn, #A = 2n and #B = 2. Therefore,
there are 2(2n) different Boolean functions from Bn to B:
n = 1: 4 Boolean functions;
n = 2: 16 Boolean functions;
n = 3: 256 Boolean functions;
n = 6: 18,446,744,073,709,551,616 Boolean functions!
Let Fn denote the set of all Boolean functions from Bn to B. On this set, an
order relation can be defined as follows:
With this order relation, the set Fn forms a Boolean algebra.

A Boolean function is an application Bn to B.
EXAMPLE 4.14.–
F1, denoted as B1 = B, includes only two elements (singletons) 0 and 1
(see Figure 4.17).
Figure 4.17. Boolean algebra B1

EXAMPLE 4.15.–
F2 :B2 = {(0,0), (0,1), (1,0), (1,1)}. The truth table and Hasse diagram
are shown in Figures 4.18 and 4.19.
Figure 4.18. Boolean algebra B2
Figure 4.19. Hasse diagram
OceanofPDF.com

5
Logic Circuits
CONCEPTS COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER.–
Even without the intention of building a computer, gaining an
understanding of how it operates through electronic circuits can be
valuable.
Building on the previous chapter, this chapter continues the study of
Boolean functions, focusing on simplifying them using the Karnaugh
array method.
A computer’s logical functions are built from assemblies of logic
circuits, which are physically represented by electronic circuits. An
aside on computer electronics will precede a detailed explanation of
constructing logical functions using the example of a binary adder.
References: [WOO 80, VEL 19, HUR 79].
5.1. Canonical forms of a Boolean function
This chapter focuses on the set E = {0,1}. The two elements of this set
represent binary information, or bits, which are the fundamental
components of computer operations.
In the set E, the two laws of internal composition, “+” and “.”, can be
defined as equivalents of the general laws ∇ and Δ discussed in Chapter 4.
Thus, there will be:

The “+” law, often referred to as logical addition, shares similarities with
arithmetic addition, except that in this context, 1 + 1 equals 1 instead of 2.
The “.” law, known as logical multiplication, parallels its arithmetic
counterpart without variation. In this structure, elements 0 and 1 are
complements of each other. As discussed in the preceding chapter, E
illustrates a Boolean algebraic structure.
Previously, it was shown that Boolean functions fn:En →E can be defined,
where En ≡ En denotes the set of n-tuples (x1,x2,…,xn) with each xi
belonging to E. However, for large n, representing the truth tables of 22n
Boolean functions fn becomes impractical. Fortunately, there is a method to
express these functions in the form of formulas that incorporate elements of
E and the operations “+”, “.” and “inversion”. This method is based on the
fact that any Boolean function can be represented by a Boolean expression,
which is a combination of elements of E and the operations “+”, “.” and
“inversion”. The method uses De Morgan’s laws to express the negations of
each variable xi in terms of conjunctions and disjunctions, followed by
simplification using distributive and associative laws of “+”, “.” and
“inversion”. Finally, this yields a Boolean formula that describes the
Boolean function fn.
Consider Fn as the set of all Boolean functions En → E, where En represents
the set of n-tuples (x1,x2, …, xn), with each xi belonging to E. An order
relation can be defined on Fn such that:
Indeed, Fn represents a Boolean algebra structure. Within Fn, there are
“special” functions known as minterms, which take the value 1 exactly
once. These minterms are the immediate successors of the null element,
which always takes the value 0. They are sometimes referred to as atoms. It
should be noted that minterms are important in logic circuit theory. They are

used in the synthesis of Boolean functions in combinatorics, as discussed
later.
EXAMPLE 5.1.–
Consider F1 the set of Boolean functions E →E. There are four possible
functions represented schematically in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1. The four possible functions
The null element in the set F2 is the function f1, which always returns 0
for all possible inputs.
The functions f2 and f3 are minterms, i.e. they return the value 1 for a
single combination of inputs, while other combinations return 0.
In contrast, the function f4 always returns 1 for all possible inputs and is
therefore not a minterm.

EXAMPLE 5.2.–
The set F2 is composed of all Boolean functions from E2 to E. This set
contains 16 distinct functions, shown schematically in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2. The 16 possible functions of F2
The null element is f1, the minterms are f2, f3, f4 and f5.
Since truth tables have 2n rows, Fn contains 2n minterms. Regarding the
process, the following result is assumed.
THEOREM. 5.1.–
Any Boolean function Fn can be expressed from the minterms, which
are less than it: 
EXAMPLE 5.3.–
In the set 
EXAMPLE 5.4.–
In the set F2: f8 = f5 + f2.The observation from the truth tables depend
on the variables involved in functions f2 and f5. Understanding these
truth tables is crucial for assessing the validity of the expression of f8.

Moreover, each minterm can be represented by the conjunctive
combinations of ai and āj, as stated in the following theorem, which will
also be admitted.
THEOREM 5.2.–
The minterms of Fn are expressed in the form m = a1.a2. … .ap, where
each ai is either xi or 
.
EXAMPLE 5.5.–
In the set F1, where x represents a variable:
f2 is a minterm of F1 where 
f3 is a minterm of F1 where f3 = x
EXAMPLE 5.6.–
In the set F2:
f3 is a minterm of F2, where 
f4 is a minterm of F2, where 
f5 is a minterm of F2, where f5 = x. y
f2 is a minterm of F2, where 
It is evident that using the two previous theorems allows for the expression
of a Boolean function as a disjunction of conjunctions, known as the
disjunctive canonical form. This form is unique for each Boolean function.
The practical method for finding the minterms from the truth table is
straightforward:

Identify the combinations of values of xi which give a value 1 for the
function f(x1,x2,…,xn). These are the minterms.
Form the corresponding minterm using the values of x1, x2, … , xn by
setting m = a1.a2 ….an where ai = xi if xi = 1 or 
 if xi = 0 for
each minterm m identified.
The Boolean function f can then be expressed simply as the sum of the
previously identified minterms: f = m1 + m2 + …‥ + mp, where m1, m2, …
mp are the minterms.
EXAMPLE 5.7.–
In the set F2, consider the function f12, whose minterms are provided in
Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3. Identification of minterms

EXAMPLE 5.8.–
In the set F3, consider the function f. The minterms are defined in
Figure 5.4.
Figure 5.4. Identification of minterms
The laws “+” and “.” being dual, it is clear that there exists another
canonical form known as the conjunctive canonical form, which is
expressed as a conjunction of disjunctions.
The notion of maxterm, which is the function of Fn that evaluates to 0
exactly once, is the dual concept of minterm. Let us illustrate this with the
following examples.

EXAMPLE 5.9.–
Consider the set F2. Consider the function f12 for which the maxterm M
corresponds to the “0”s of the function in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5. Identification of maxterm

EXAMPLE 5.10.–
Consider the set F3. Consider f, one of the Boolean functions in this set.
The maxterms corresponding to the “0”s of this function as shown in
Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6. Identification of maxterms
5.2. Reduction of a Boolean function
The canonical disjunctive and conjunctive forms are valuable because they
are unique and facilitate comparison of two Boolean expressions to
determine their equivalence or disparity. However, they can be redundant,
and there are instances where simplification is feasible.

EXAMPLE 5.11.–
Reduction of F2 functions (see Figure 5.7).
Figure 5.7. Reduction of F2 functions
In Boolean algebra, a prime monomial in an expression A is defined as a
monomial M such that M + A = A, and M does not contain a simpler
monomial with the same property.

EXAMPLE 5.12.–
Let us show that 
 is a prime monomial in
.
Indeed, firstly, there is no simpler form of this monomial. For instance,
 can be expressed as 
.
The canonical form of A then becomes:
The canonical form of 
 is 
The equation simplifies to
Therefore, 
 is indeed a prime monomial of A.
Prime monomials have a particular importance, as indicated by the
following theorem (which is admitted).
THEOREM 5.3.–
If a Boolean expression A is in a reduced disjunctive form, each of its
monomials is a prime monomial of A.
This means that the reduced disjunctive form of A is a disjunction of the
prime monomials of A (but not necessarily all). The practical method for
finding all prime monomials of a Boolean expression A is based on the
notion of consensus: given two monomials of forms x.m1 and 
, the
monomial m1.m2 is called the consensus of monomials x.m1 and 
.
The method can be implemented in several stages:
1. Putting A to its polynomial form and creating the list L of its
monomials.
2. Iterating over each variable x:

a. Splitting list L into three sublists: L1 (monomials containing x),
L2 (monomials containing ) and L3 (other monomials).
b. If L1 or L2 is empty, proceeding to the next variable; otherwise,
forming the list L′ by computing consensuses from L1 and L2
(multiplying the monomials of each pair and eliminating
duplicate variables). Adjusting L′ into L involves adding
monomials not containing the variable x and removing those
divisible by existing monomials in L.
3. The resulting list L obtained from step 2 contains all prime monomials
of A.

EXAMPLE 5.13.–
Given 
Consensus of 
, so nothing is added to L.
For 
Consensus of 
. The non-zero
monomial to add to L is 
.
Initially, 
, and after refinement, the
set becomes: 
.
For 
Consensus of 
. The non-zero
monomial to add to L is (x.y).
Initially, 
However, 
 is not the reduced form of A. The
reduced form is obtained by constructing a double-entry table (see
Figure 5.8), listing the minterms of the disjunctive canonical form of A
alongside the prime monomials:

Figure 5.8. Practical table
(x.y) generates (x.y.z) and 
 since
.
Also, (y.z) generates (x.y.z) and 
. Finally, 
 generates
 and 
.
Highlighting the corresponding boxes in the table (see Figure 5.8), it
becomes (x.y) and 
 accounting for all the minterms, thus forming
the reduced form: 
.
5.3. Karnaugh tables
A graphical method known as the Karnaugh method, developed by Veitch
and Karnaugh, simplifies the process of obtaining the reduced form of a
Boolean function En → E.
This method uses tables called Karnaugh tables, illustrated for n = 1,2,3 and
4 in Figure 5.9:

Figure 5.9. Karnaugh tables
Each table contains 2n boxes. In the first series of tables, these boxes
represent the different combinations of variables.
In the second series (sometimes referred to as a Veitch diagram), each
variable is represented by 1 and its inverse (complement) by 0.
By convention, in these tables, the boxes of the first row are adjacent
to those in the last row, and similarly, the boxes in the left column are
adjacent to those in the right column.
Here is how to use Karnaugh tables to simplify a three-variable Boolean
function (x, y, z) with an output E. Figure 5.10 shows the corresponding
table with 0s and 1s:
Place 1s and 0s: fill in the Karnaugh table by placing a 1s in each box
corresponding to the combinations of variables for which the function
E equals 1. Place 0s in all other boxes.
Identify groups of 1s: look for all possible groups of adjacent 1s in the
table. Groups can be horizontal or vertical, but not diagonal. Each

group can contain 1, 2, 4 or 8 boxes. Boxes must be adjacent in the
table, and groups can wrap around the edges of the board (edges).
Write expressions for groups: for each group of 1s, write an expression
that includes all the variables in the table (x, y, and z) for which the
boxes in the group contain 1s. If a group includes a box with a 0,
ignore that box in the expression.
Simplify expressions: apply Boolean laws to simplify each expression
derived from the groups of 1s.
Combine expressions: write the simplified Boolean function by
combining all the simplified expressions using the “or” operator.
This yields a simplified function with fewer terms than the original
function.
Figure 5.10. Table with 0s and 1s
Highlight a combination of variables by shading the boxes (see Figure
5.11).
Figure 5.11. Practical form of Karnaugh tables
Note that adjacent boxes cause certain variables to disappear from the
expression.

EXAMPLE 5.14.–
Consider function A from the previous example and construct its truth
table (see Figure 5.12).
The function is represented by the Karnaugh table in Figure 5.13 (the
boxes corresponding to the value 1 are shaded). This diagram is
decomposed as shown in Figure 5.14, using adjacent boxes to eliminate
variables, resulting in 
 Thus, the previously obtained
reduced form is derived.
Figure 5.12. Truth table
Figure 5.13. Karnaugh table
Figure 5.14. Decomposition

EXAMPLE 5.15.–
Let us provide additional examples illustrating a Boolean function A of
three variables. It is important to consider the adjacency of the
peripheral boxes (see Figure 5.15(a)–(c))
Figure 5.15(a). 
Figure 5.15(b). 
Figure 5.15(c). 
5.4. Elementary logic circuits
In logic, the following operations are studied on propositions: the negation
(NOT) noted ; the conjunction (AND) noted ∧; the disjunction
(INCLUSIVE OR) noted ∨; and the “exclusive OR” operator (XOR), each
with their truth table where the values are T (true) or F (false). These
operations are then applied to computer circuits. Modern computers process
basic information known as bits, which have two possible values: 0 and 1.
Logical values T (true) and F (false) correspond to bits 1 and 0,
respectively. Thus, computer logic operates with a two-element set: E = {0,
1}. Common terminology and representations in electronics are used, with
elementary logic functions including:

NOT function (corresponding to the NOT operation): any element x of
E corresponds to its opposite  (see Figure 5.16).
Figure 5.16. NOT function
The truth table for this logic function is straightforward, as shown in Figure
5.17. This logic function corresponds to an electronic circuit known as a
NOT gate, typically represented as shown in Figure 5.18.
Figure 5.17. Truth table for NOT
Figure 5.18. NOT gate
The small loop in the previous diagram is important as it signifies the
negation of the input bit. If omitted, the identity function is obtained,
as shown in Figure 5.19.
Figure 5.19. YES circuit
However, this representation is only used when other operations occur
without altering the input “bit”, such as signal amplification or temporary
recording (buffer).
The logical function corresponding to AND and its truth table (see
Figure 5.20) is identical to that seen previously in propositional logic
but noted in bits. The result of this AND function, denoted as x.y, is
sometimes called “logical multiplication”. It operates similarly to
arithmetic multiplication. The corresponding logic circuit for this
function is an AND gate, as shown in Figure 5.21.

Figure 5.20. Truth table for AND
Figure 5.21. AND gate
The OR function corresponds to the “inclusive OR” operation, whose
truth table is shown in Figure 5.22.
Figure 5.22. Truth table for OR
Figure 5.23. OR gate
The result is denoted by x + y because this function is sometimes referred to
as “logical addition”. However, it differs from arithmetic addition because 1
+ 1 = 1 in binary (with only two bits). The logic circuit corresponding to
this function is an OR gate, shown in Figure 5.23.
The XOR function corresponds to exclusive OR. Its truth table is
shown in Figure 5.24.

Figure 5.24. Truth table for XOR
Figure 5.25. XOR gate
The notation x⊕y is used to indicate the result. The distinction from the OR
function is observed in the last row of the truth table. The logic circuit
corresponding to this function is an XOR gate, represented by Figure 5.25.
The NAND function is the negation of the AND function, as shown in
Figure 5.26.
Figure 5.26. Truth table for NAND
Figure 5.27. NAND gate
The corresponding logic circuit is the NAND gate, which is simply
represented by adding a circle (negation) on the AND gate (see Figure
5.27). This circuit can also be represented as shown in Figure 5.28.

Figure 5.28. Equivalence of circuits
In the same manner, the logical function NOR is the negation of the
OR function, where the result is 
 (see Figure 5.29).
Figure 5.29. Truth table for XOR
Figure 5.30. XOR gate
The corresponding logic circuit is the NOR gate, as shown in Figure 5.30.
This circuit can be implemented using an OR gate and a NOT gate, as
shown in Figure 5.31.
Figure 5.31. Equivalence of circuits
At this point, it is useful to recall some of the results previously presented
that will be beneficial later:
1. Equipped with the operations NOT, OR, AND, the set E = {0, 1} forms
a Boolean algebra structure (E, +, .) which can be axiomatized with the
following postulates:

2. The laws of addition (“+”) and multiplication (“.”) are both
commutative and associative. For example,
3. The laws of addition (“+”) and multiplication (“.”) are distributive with
respect to each other. For example,
4. Generalized Morgan’s theorem (or Shannon’s theorem): For any
logical expression f, the following holds:
For example, 
 or
5. Decomposition theorem: any logical function of several Boolean
variables can be expressed in two canonical forms:
In the first form, the decomposition is a logical product of “basic” logical
sums, and in the second form, the decomposition is a logical sum of “basic”
logical products. The “basic” terms may not all appear in the decomposition
and are obtained by combinations of variables and their complements.

So,
The six logic circuits NOT, OR, AND, NOR, NAND, XOR are basic
circuits because combinations of these circuits facilitate the creation of
more complex circuits. A complete logic set is a minimal set of basic
circuits that allows the construction of the six basic circuits mentioned
earlier. It should be noted that NOT, AND and OR circuits can generate
NAND, NOR and XOR circuits (see Figure 5.32).
Figure 5.32. Complete logic group {NAND, NOR, XOR}
Furthermore, the decomposition theorem states that the three circuits NOT,
OR and AND can be obtained from combinations of NOT with AND or
NOT with OR. It results in two primary complete logical groups:
The complete logical group {NOT, AND} (see Figure 5.33).
Figure 5.33. Complete logical group {NOT, AND}
The complete logical group {NOT, OR} (see Figure 5.34).

Figure 5.34. Complete logical group {NOT, OR}
However, there are even simpler complete logical groups:
The complete logical group {NOR} (see Figure 5.35).
Figure 5.35. Complete logic group {NOR}
The complete logic group {NAND} (see Figure 5.36).

Figure 5.36. Complete logic group {NAND}
5.5. A little on electronics
Logic circuits are electrical circuits designed to transform one or more input
signals into an output signal based on the logic function implemented by an
electronic device.
Diodes and transistors are the basic and fundamental components of logic
circuits, and their introduction into electronics has generated a
technological revolution. Without extensively discussing the detailed
principles of these components, let us explore their role in digital
electronics.
An N-type semiconductor is a doped semiconductor (such as silicon or
germanium) that contains impurities releasing electrons, leading to an
excess of electrons and a deficiency of positive charges. These free
electrons act as negative charge carriers. Conversely, a P-type
semiconductor is doped with impurities that create electron void vacancies
known as holes, which behave as positive charge carriers.

Figure 5.37. Diode
A diode is an electronic component that consists of a PN junction, where P
represents the P-type region and N the N-type region. It allows the passage
of electric current in only one direction, from the P-type region to the N-
type region, while blocking current in the opposite direction. Its
conventional representation is shown in Figure 5.37.
A transistor is essentially composed of two diodes sharing a common
region. Consequently, two types of transistors can be obtained:
The PNP transistor (see Figure 5.38) is shown schematically in Figure
5.39.
Figure 5.38. PNP transistor
Figure 5.39. PNP schematization
The NPN transistor (see Figure 5.40) is schematically shown in Figure
5.41.

Figure 5.40. NPN transistor
Figure 5.41. NPN schematization
A transistor consists of three electrodes: the base (B), the emitter € and the
collector (C).
Figure 5.42. Transistor operation
In digital circuits, transistors are often used in switching, operating in two
states: either they are in saturation mode (allowing current to pass) or in
cutoff mode (blocking current). Depending on the voltage applied to the
base, current can flow between the collector and the emitter (saturation
mode: passing regime) or be blocked (cutoff mode: non-passing regime)
(see Figure 5.42).
In bipolar transistors, which include those described above, conduction
occurs due to the simultaneous movement of electric charge carriers of
opposite signs: negative electrons and positive holes. Bipolar transistors are
part of bipolar technology (TTL family and derivatives). There are also
unipolar transistors (MOS family and derivatives) which require the
movement of only one type of charge carrier, either electrons or holes.
Unipolar transistors are of two types: P channel and N channel. These
components tend to replace bipolar-type components.

Digital electronics is primarily based on the use of digital integrated
circuits. These circuits, which vary in complexity, consist of numerous
components manufactured simultaneously in a single process from
semiconductors. A measure of this complexity is the number of transistors
contained within each integrated circuit.
In 1976, with VLSI (Very-Large-Scale Integration) technology, integrated
circuits contained between 10,000 and 100,000 transistors, also referred to
as electronic chips due to their small size achieved through miniaturization.
Today, each electronic chip typically contains several hundred million
transistors. Current microprocessors, the most complex integrated circuits,
incorporate approximately 3 billion transistors. The simplest commercial
integrated circuits are packaged in boxes with pins for soldering onto a
printed circuit board, which facilitates connections within an electronic
system. A common package type is the DIL (Dual-In-Line) package, as
shown in Figure 5.43, with a 14-pin (integrated circuit) DIL package.
Figure 5.43. A hardware circuit in a DIL package
Figure 5.44. Microprocessor
A microprocessor, such as the one shown in Figure 5.44 (a square with a

side of 3 cm), requires a significant number of pins.
To convert a logical circuit into its hardware implementation, it is necessary
to establish a logical convention, which associates bits 0 and 1 with values
of a physical quantity, such as an electrical voltage. In most cases, the
voltage is fixed at 0 or 5 volts (for TTL or MOS circuits). The logical
convention adopted is as follows: bit 0 → 0 volt and bit 1 → x volts.
However, in reality, due to inevitable voltage losses caused by internal
resistors, bit 0 and bit 1 correspond to ranges of values. For TTL circuits,
these ranges are shown in Figure 5.45.
Figure 5.45. Voltage definition of bits 0 and 1
To illustrate the implementation of this logic convention, Figure 5.46
briefly shows how a NOT gate can be realized using an NPN transistor.
Figure 5.46. NOT gate made by a transistor
If a voltage of +5V is applied to emitter E (bit 1), the NPN transistor
enters saturation, causing the voltage on the collector C to be close to
0V (low level).

If the emitter E is connected to ground (bit 0), the NPN transistor is
blocked, and no current flows through the resistor R. The voltage on
the collector then approaches +5V (high level).
Figure 5.47 OR gate made with two diodes
Figure 5.47 shows the hardware implementation of an OR gate with two
diodes.
5.6. Construction of logical functions
Karnaugh tables are valuable tools for constructing logic circuits
corresponding to a specified Boolean function. Here are some examples to
illustrate their utility.

EXAMPLE 5.16.–
Let us design a logic circuit for the Boolean function
 This function is
already in canonical form, and its truth table is provided in Figure 5.48.
Figure 5.48. Truth table of f(x, y, z)
For four variables, the Karnaugh table representing this function is
shown in Figure 5.49 and can be easily decomposed. Therefore, the
reduced form of the function is 
This logical form facilitates the simplification of the logic circuit
corresponding to this function.
Figure 5.49. Karnaugh tables
Figure 5.50. Logic circuit proposal

Noting that 
, a proposed logic circuit can be seen in Figure
5.50.

EXAMPLE 5.17.–
Let us find the logic circuits for the functions of two variables
 and R = x.y. These functions are already in their reduced
form, as confirmed by the Karnaugh tables (see Figure 5.51). Since
there are no adjacent boxes, S and R are indeed in reduced form. The
corresponding circuits are shown in Figure 5.52.
Figure 5.51. Karnaugh tables
Figure 5.52. First proposal for a logic circuit
This logic circuit uses three types of logic gates. It can be verified that
only two types of logic gates are needed, as shown in the equivalent
circuit in Figure 5.53.

Figure 5.53. Second logic circuit proposal
Remember this logic circuit because it corresponds to a half-adder.
There is an even simpler circuit, as will be shown shortly.

EXAMPLE 5.18.–
Consider the Boolean function
. Let us try to simplify
this function using Karnaugh tables. The Karnaugh table of f can be
broken-down as shown in Figure 5.54.
Figure 5.54. Karnaugh tables
Therefore, the reduced form is 
, and the corresponding
logic circuit is given in Figure 5.55.
Figure 5.55. Proposed logic circuit
5.7. A basic circuit: the binary adder
Numbers are represented in the binary system for computer use. The
computer, via its processing unit, performs calculations on these numbers.
The simplest operation is addition. Addition in the binary system is carried
out similarly to addition in the decimal system. For example, to perform the
decimal addition 24 + 57 = 81, it can be translated into the binary system by
adding 11000 (corresponding to 24 in binary) with 111001 (corresponding

to 57 in binary), resulting in 1010001 (corresponding to 81 in binary), as
shown in Figure 5.56.
In binary arithmetic, as in decimal arithmetic, the addition of two numbers
can generate carries. In the binary system, there are only two possible
digits, 0 and 1, so adding two digits can give a sum of 0, 1, 10 (equivalent
to 2 in decimal) or 11 (equivalent to 3 in decimal) if a carry is generated.
Figure 5.56. Binary addition
In the given example, the sum of 24 and 57 in decimal is 81. In binary, this
corresponds to the addition of 11000 and 111001, which gives 1010001.
The schema shows two carries generated when adding the columns of bits
with weights 2 and 4. These carries are highlighted in red in the schema of
Figure 5.56.
A half-adder is an elementary component that performs column-wise
addition, similar to “manual” addition. This component takes two bits x and
y as inputs and produces a sum S and a possible carry R as outputs. This
component must follow the addition table shown in Figure 5.57.
Figure 5.57. Truth tables for S and R
Two Boolean functions S and R must be found that provide the correct
results. These functions are not difficult to find:
These functions were illustrated in a previous example, and the logic circuit
corresponding to this half-adder is shown in Figure 5.58. Specifically, S = x

⊕ y, where ⊕ denotes exclusive OR. Therefore, an XOR gate is used to
obtain S, and an AND gate is used to obtain R.
Figure 5.58. Logic circuit for S and R
A full adder is a combinatorial logic circuit used for column-wise additions,
considering the carry from the previous step. Unlike the half-adder, the full
adder takes three inputs: two bits to be added (x and y) and a carry input (c).
The outputs are a sum S and a carry-out R for the next step. To construct a
full adder, two half-adders can be combined with an OR logic gate. The
Boolean functions for the result S and the carry R are as follows:
where the symbol “⊕” designates the XOR logic gate, the symbol “.”
Designates the AND logic gate and the symbol “+” designates the OR logic
gate. The logic circuit corresponding to the full adder is given in Figure
5.59, where rn−1 plays the role of c in the previous equations.
Several full adders can be used in parallel to add two binary numbers
represented by several bits, for example, a 4-bit number X and a 4-bit
number Y. The bits of the numbers X and Y are denoted as X0, X1, X2, X3
for X and Y0, Y1, Y2, Y3 for Y, where index 0 indicates the lowest weight
and index 3 the highest weight. Similarly, the bits of the sum S are also
denoted as S0, S1, S2, S3. The parallel connection is shown in Figure 5.60.

Figure 5.59. Full adder
Figure 5.60. Electronic adder schema
Such a logic circuit is commercially implemented by an integrated circuit
known by the code SN 7483 (see Figure 5.61).
Figure 5.61. The SN7483 box
OceanofPDF.com

6
Arithmetic
CONCEPTS COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER.–
Arithmetic is often presented as the science of numbers and the study of
their properties. The properties, especially those of integers, form the
basis of encryption methods used to make information indecipherable
by third parties. Methods of encrypting information will be explored in
a future chapter, so it is important to first recall the basic notions of
arithmetic, focusing specifically on integers.
The discussion will start with the Euclidean division, which leads to
prime numbers, a topic that has engaged many mathematicians for
centuries.
The discussion will also cover congruences, defined by a special
operation called modulo, with an example of their use involving elliptic
curves.
The exploration will conclude with Bézout’s identity, theorem and
algorithm.
References: [VEL 19, BUC 98, MUL 18, PRA 23].
6.1. Reminder about integers
Recalling some definitions and notations relating to integers:
ℕ represents the set of natural numbers, i.e. positive integers including
zero: ℕ = {0, 1, 2, 3, …, n, …}.
ℕ* represents the set of non-zero natural numbers, i.e. all natural
numbers except zero: ℕ* = {1, 2, 3, …, n, …}.

ℤ represents the set of relative integers, i.e. positive, negative and zero
integers: ℤ = {…,−n, ….,−3,−2,−1,0,1,2,3, …,n,…} (n > 0).
ℤ* represents the set of non-zero relative integers, i.e. all relative
integers except zero: ℤ* = {…, −n, …, −3, −2, −1,1,2,3, …, n,…} (n >
0).
6.2. Euclidean division
DEFINITION.–
Euclidean division in the set ℤ: let a and b be two integers such that b ≠
0. There exist two unique integers q and r such that:
where q is called the quotient of the division of a by b, and r is called
the remainder of this division.
DEFINITION.–
Euclidean division in the set ℕ: let a and b be two natural integers such
that b is different from 0. There exist two unique integers q and r such
that:
where q is called the quotient of the division of a by b, and r is called
the remainder of this division.

DEFINITION.–
If r = 0, then a = b × q, indicating that b divides a. In this case, a is a
multiple of b (i.e. there exists a natural number q such that a = b × q),
and b is a divisor of a (i.e. there exists a natural number k such that a =
k × q).
The quotient q is also a multiple of b and k is also a multiple of a. Let us
return to the general case of the Euclidean division and demonstrate that q
and r indeed exist and are unique.
1) Existence
Let us start by recalling two results known as Archimedes’ properties:
PROPERTY 1.–
(Archimedes) Let a ∈ ℕ, b ∈ ℕ*. Then, n ∈ ℕ exists such that n × b ≥
a.
Indeed, if a = 0, take n = 1; if a ≠ 0, take n = a.
PROPERTY 2.–
(Archimedes) Let a ∈ ℕ, b ∈ ℕ*. Then, there exists q ∈ ℕ such that b
× q ≤ a < b × (q + 1).
Either E = {n ∈ ℕ | n × b > a}. According to Archimedes’ first property,
since a + 1 ∈ ℕ, there exists m such that m × b ≥ a + 1, which shows that E
is not empty. Moreover, a is a lower bound of E, which means that there
exists a smaller p of E such that p − 1 does not belong to E. Therefore, (p −
1) × b ≤ a < p × b, which can be written by positing q = p − 1: b × q ≤ a < b
× q + b, or equivalently 0 ≤ a − b × q < b which proves property 2.
If r = a − b × q then a = b × q + r and 0 ≤ r < b, which demonstrates the
existence in the case of N.
Now, let us move on to ℤ. Four cases can be considered:

When a > 0 and b > 0: the division is straightforward, as it is the same
as within ℕ.
When a > 0 and b < 0: in ℕ, a = (−b) × q + r with 0 ≤ r < −b. The
solution pair is (−q, r).
When a < 0 and b > 0: in ℕ, −a = b × q + r with 0 ℕ r < b. Therefore,
a = (−b) × q − r = b × (−q − 1) + (b − r). For r = 0, the solution pair is
(−q, 0). For r ≠ 0, the solution pair is (−q − 1, b − r).
When a < 0 and b < 0: in ℕ, −a = (−b) × q + r with 0 ≤ r < −b.
Therefore, a = b × q − r and a = b × (q + 1) − b − r. If r = 0, the
solution pair is (−q, 0). If r ≠ 0, the solution pair is (q + 1, −r − b).
Therefore, there is always a solution (q, r) in all cases for ℕ and for ℤ.
2) Uniqueness
Let us use proof by contradiction by assuming the existence of two different
pairs (q, r) and (q′, r′) such that a = b × q + r = b × q′ + r′ with 0 ≤ r, r′ < b.
Figure 6.1. |r − r′| < b
Then, it follows that b × q − b × q′ = r′ − r, or b × (q − q′) = r′ − r which
implies that b divides r′ − r. Since 0 ≤ r, r′ < b, |r′ − r| < |b| holds. Thus, r′ −
r must equal 0, leading to q = q′ and r = r′. Therefore, the pair (q, r) is
unique.
Therefore, this negates the initial hypothesis, conclusively proving the
uniqueness of the pair (q, r).
6.3. Divisibility and prime numbers
In the case where the remainder of the Euclidean division is equal to 0, the
relationship simplifies to a = b × q. This expression establishes a

relationship in ℕ* (the set of positive natural numbers) between a and b,
which can be expressed by b divides a, denoted as b | a.
The properties of the relation “|” can be summarized as follows:
Reflexivity: a | a since a = 1 × a.
Antisymmetry: b | a ⇏ a | b. If b | a, then a = b × q. However, a | b
would imply b = a × q′, which leads to a = a × q × q′. This equality
holds only if q × q′ = 1, implying q = q′ = 1 and a = b, contradicting a
≠ b (the initial assumption).
Transitivity: if c | b and b | a then c | a. Given c | b and b | a, b = c × q
and a = b × q′. Thus, a = c × q × q′ demonstrating c | a.
With these three properties, the relationship “|” forms an order relationship
in ℕ*. Additionally:
If c | a and c | b, then c | (l × a + m × b) for l, m ∈ ℤ. In particular, c |
(a + b) and c | (a − b).
DEFINITION.–
A number x ∈ ℕ*, greater than 1, is prime if it only has 1 and itself as
divisors.
Prime numbers indeed play an important role in the encryption of digital
information, a topic that will be explored further.
Let us cite Euclid’s definition of prime numbers: a prime number is a
number which has exactly 2 divisors. All integers admit 1 as a divisor; any
non-zero integer has itself as a divisor. Therefore:
0 is not prime because it has infinitely many divisors;
1 is not prime because it has only one divisor: itself;
any integer other than 0 and 1 has at least 2 divisors (1 and itself). It
may have more divisors, but if it does not, it is prime.

The first 10 prime numbers are 2, 3, 5; 7; 11, 13, 17, 19, 23.
Prime numbers have many properties, some of which we examine.
THEOREM 6.1.–
If an integer is strictly greater than 1, then its smallest divisor strictly
greater than 1 is a prime number.
The proof of the above theorem is done by reasoning through contradiction.
Let a be an integer greater than 1. It has at least two divisors: itself and 1. It
may have other divisors as well, but let ft b denote the smallest divisor
greater than 1.
Assume, for contradiction, that b is not a prime number, meaning it has a
divisor c other than 1 and itself, and c < b. Therefore, c divides b. Since b
divides a, by transitivity, c also divides a. However, this contradicts the
assumption that b is the smallest divisor of a.
Therefore, b cannot be non-prime and must be a prime number. Hence, the
smallest divisor of any integer greater than 1 is a prime number.
THEOREM 6.2.–
Any number in ℕ*, greater than or equal to 2, is either a prime number
or a product of prime numbers.
Let us prove this theorem by mathematical induction:
Base case: the proposition is true for number 2, which is a prime
number.
Inductive step: assume that the proposition is true for all numbers from
2 to n. That is, each integer k (where 2 ≤ k ≤ n) is either a prime
number or a product of prime numbers.
To prove: show that the proposition holds for n + 1.

According to theorem 6.1, n + 1 has a prime divisor p, which is the smallest
divisor of n + 1. Consider 
. Let us form the integer 
, which is
less than n + 1 since p is greater than 1. Thus, 
is between 2 and n.
By inductive hypothesis, 
 is either a prime number or a product of
prime numbers. Therefore, n + 1 itself is either prime (if 
 = 1) or a
product of p and 
, where both p and 
are prime numbers (by
the induction assumption).
Thus, the proposition is true for n + 1.
Therefore, mathematical induction, the proposition is true for all integers
ℕ* greater than or equal to 2.
Theorem 6.2 states that an integer can be decomposed into a product of
prime numbers of the form n = pa × qb × … × rc where p, q, …, r are prime
numbers. For example, the decomposition of 245 000 is 245 000 = 23 × 54 ×
72.
We may wonder how many prime numbers are there in the set ℕ*, which
has infinite cardinality.
THEOREM 6.3.–
There are countably infinitely many prime numbers.
Let us consider a sequence Sk of prime numbers p1, p2, p3, …, pk and form
the number m = p1 × p2 × p3 × … × pk+1. According to theorem 6.1, m has a
smallest prime divisor q strictly greater than 1. This prime number q is
different from the numbers in the sequence Sk.
If q were not different from the primes p1, p2, …, pk, then q would divide
both m and p1 × p2 × p3 × … × pk. Consequently, q would also divide their
difference, which is 1. However, since q > 1, this scenario contradicts the

property that only 1 and itself can divide 1. Therefore, q must indeed be a
prime number distinct from p1, p2, …, pk.
Therefore, an additional prime number is obtained that can be added to the
sequence Sk. This construction can be repeated indefinitely, showing that
the sequence Sk grows continuously, indicating that prime numbers form a
countably infinite set. Eratosthenes proposed a method for finding all prime
numbers less than a given integer N > 1: the sieve of Eratosthenes.
The sieve of Eratosthenes method consists of the following steps:
1. Create a list of all integers from 2 to N (excluding 1, which is not
prime).
2. Start with the first number in the list, which is 2, and mark it as prime.
3. Eliminate from the list all multiples of this prime number (2) by
marking them as non-prime.
4. Move to the next unmarked number in the list (3), which will be the
next prime number, and repeat step 3.
5. Continue this process until all numbers in the list are processed.
At the end of the method, the only unmarked numbers in the list will be
prime numbers less than N. The sieve of the Eratosthenes algorithm
efficiently identifies prime numbers up to a specified limit N, although its
computational complexity increases with larger values of N. For very large
values of N, more advanced methods may be employed to find prime
numbers.
The main steps of the sieve of the Eratosthenes algorithm are as follows:
L = an array of Booleans initialized to the value 1 (True) and 
of size N.
Set L[1] = 0 (False)
For i = 2 to N
    If L[i] = 1
           For j = i2 to N in steps of i
           L[j] = 0
           EndFor
    EndIf

EndFor
Return L
The algorithm notes the square of i in the loop for j. Starting from i2 (i. e., i
× i) ensures that multiples of i less than i2 have already been eliminated
(determined to be non-prime). The list L maintains information about
whether numbers from 1 to N are prime or non-prime.
Theorems 6.1 and 6.2 outline the procedure to decompose a number n into
its prime factors. Begin by identifying p1, the smallest prime divisor of the
number n. Divide n by p1 to obtain m, the quotient. Repeat the process by
finding p2, the smallest prime divisor of m Continue this iterative process m
becomes a prime number (i.e. non-decomposable), which indicates that n
has been completely decomposed into its prime factors. These steps can
also be summarized as follows:
1. Identify the smallest prime divisor p1 of n.
2. Compute the quotient m = n/p1.
3. Find the smallest prime divisor p2 of m.
4. Calculate the quotient m = m/p2.
5. Repeat steps 3 and 4 until m is a prime number.
The iterative process makes it possible to decompose n into a product of
prime factors. Each prime divisor p found is a distinct prime factor of n.
Note that theorems 6.1 and 6.2 guarantee the existence of this
decomposition into prime factors for any integer n greater than 1.

EXAMPLE 6.1.–
245000 can be decomposed into its prime factors as follows:


To construct a number from prime numbers, simply multiply them together.
For instance, using prime numbers p and q, the number m is formed as m =
p × q, which typically is not a prime number itself.
However, the inverse problem of determining the prime factors p and q
starting from a given number m is much more difficult, especially when m
is a large number. Finding the prime factors of a number is a complex
problem and often requires significant computational resources in terms of
capacity and time. Even with computer assistance, effectively factoring
large numbers can be arduous. Computers have limitations in computational
capacity and may require specific methods, such as advanced factorization
algorithms, to factor very large numbers. Additionally, proving that a
number is prime is also a complex problem, particularly for large numbers.
For example, Mersenne numbers, which are of the form 2n − 1, were once
“likely” to be prime. However, not all Mersenne numbers are prime. For
instance, (211− 1) = 23 × 89 is not prime, and (267 − 1) = 193707721 ×
761838257287 is not prime (Cole - 1903). Some Mersenne numbers are
indeed prime, such as (261 − 1) (Pervouchine - 1883). The challenge lies in
proving or disproving the primality of Mersenne numbers. With older
computers, which had limitations in terms of number representation (32-bit
coding quickly reaches limits: (2257 − 1) has 257 “1s” in binary), this task
was particularly challenging.
The study and exploration of prime numbers have been, and continue to be,
subject to significant mathematical research. Some of the greatest
mathematicians have made remarkable contributions to this field, including
Eratosthenes, Euclid, Euler, Fermat, Gauss, Dirichlet, Riemann and others.
Thus, the prime numbers constitute an infinity within the infinity of
integers. There are 168 prime numbers among integers up to 1,000 (16.8%),
9,592 among integers up to 100,000 (9.6%), 33,860 among integers up to
400,000 (8.5%), 74,498 among integers up to 1,000,000 (7.8%), 5761455
among integers up to 100,000,000 (5.8%). They become less frequent
among large integers. The largest known prime number, as of 2023, is
(282589933 − 1).

6.4. GCD and LCM
The abbreviations used in the title of this section mean greater common
divisor (GCD) and least common multiple (LCM), respectively.
Given two numbers a and b belonging to ℕ* (the set of strictly positive
integers), let E be the set of their common divisors. The smallest element of
E is obviously 1, and the largest element is less than or equal to min(a, b).
This indicates that E is a finite set. There is a largest element in E, called the
GCD.
EXAMPLE 6.2.–
The numbers 28 and 36 have 1, 2 and 4 as common divisors; the GCD
is therefore 4: GCD(28,36) = 4.
DEFINITION.–
The numbers a and b are coprime if GCD(a, b) = 1
This means that two prime numbers have no common divisor other than 1.
EXAMPLE 6.3.–
The numbers 28 and 27 are coprime. Indeed, 28 = 22 × 7 and 27 = 33
have no common factor (other than 1 of course).
Euclid’s algorithm finds the GCD of two numbers iteratively. This
algorithm is based on the following property:
THEOREM 6.4.–
Let a and b be in ℕ* and r is the remainder of the Euclidean division of
a by b, then GCD(a, b) = GCD(b, r).

The Euclidean division of a by b, denoted as a = b × q + r, is a fundamental
property. If d is a divisor of both b and r, then it also divides a. Therefore, d
is a common divisor of a and of b.
Conversely, if d is a common divisor of a and b, then it divides r = a − b × q
as well. Hence, d is a common divisor of b and r.
In other words, the set of common divisors of a and b is identical to the set
of common divisors of b and r. Specifically, this equivalence implies that
GCD(a, b) = GCD(b, r).
Assuming a > b, the Euclidean algorithm proceeds by repeating applying
the division: a = p1 × b + r1, b = p2 × r1 + r2, r1 = p3 × r2 + r3, etc., until the
remainder rn is zero. The last non-zero remainder obtained in this process is
indeed the GCD of the numbers a and b.
EXAMPLE 6.4.–
a = p1 × b + r1:
1680 = 1 × 1485 + 195, with a = 1680, p1 = 1, b = 1485 and r1 = 195
b = p2 × r1 + r2:
1485 = 195 × 7 + 120, with b = 1485, p2 = 195, r1 = 7 and r2 = 120
Since the remainder has become 0, the last non-zero remainder obtained
in the Euclidean algorithm is 15, i.e. GCD(1680,1485) = 15.
Prime factor decomposition allows common factors to be identified
between two numbers. Multiplying these common factors gives the GCD.

EXAMPLE 6.5.–
1680 = 24 × 3 × 5 × 7 and 1485 = 33 × 5 × 11. The product of the
common factors is 3 × 5 = 15, which is the GCD of 1680 and 1485.
Let us look at some of the properties of GCD.
THEOREM 6.5.–
The common divisors of the numbers a and b belonging to ℕ* are all
the divisors of the GCD of a and b. In other words, the set of divisors
common to a and b is equal to the set of divisors of the GCD(a, b).
Let p = GCD(a, b). Let d be a divisor of p. Therefore, d divides both a and
b. Thus, d is a common divisor of a and b. In conclusion, every divisor of
GCD(a, b) is also a common divisor of a and b.
Conversely, let d be a common divisor of a and b. Suppose a > b. There are
two possible cases:
1. If b divides a, then GCD(a, b) = b. Therefore, b divides GCD(a, b).
2. If b does not divide a, Euclid’s algorithm (theorem 6.1) is applied to
obtain GCD(a, b) = GCD(b, r), where r is the remainder of the
division of a by b.
Continuing Euclid’s algorithm,
, where rn is
the last non-zero remainder.
In both cases, d divides each remainder ri of the iterations of Euclid’s
algorithm, including the last remainder rn, which is equal to GCD(a, b).
Thus, any common divisor of a and b also divides GCD(a, b).

THEOREM 6.6.–
a, b, c ∈ ℕ*, GCD(a × c, b × c) = c × GCD(a, b).
Euclid’s algorithm is used to prove this theorem. It proceeds as follows:
1. Define c = GCD(a, b).
2. Perform Euclidean division by c × a and c × b, yielding c × a = c × b ×
q1 + c × r1, where q1 is the quotient and c × r1 is the remainder.
3. By Euclid’s algorithm property, GCD(c × a, c × b) = GCD(c × b, c ×
r1).
4. Repeat the division c × b by c × r1, resulting in c × b = c × r1 × q2 + c
× r2.
5. Continue this process until c × rn = 0.
6. Therefore, GCD(c × rn−1, 0) = c × rn−1 which equals c.
Thus, it was demonstrated that GCD(a × c, b × c) = c × GCD(a, b) from
Euclid’s algorithm. This shows that the GCD of the numbers c × a and c × b
is equal to c multiplied by the GCD of a and b.
THEOREM 6.7.–
a, b, c, d ∈ ℕ*, the GCD(a, b) divides the GCD(a × c, b × d)
A divisor of a divides a × c and a divisor of b divides b × d. Therefore, any
common divisors of a and b also divide a × c and b × d. In particular
GCD(a, b) is a divisor of a × c and b × d.
The LCM of two natural numbers are the smallest number that is a multiple
of both of them. So,

To find the LCM of two numbers from their prime decompositions, select
each prime factor that appears in either number’s decomposition. For each
prime factor, choose the highest exponent that appears in either number’s
decomposition.
EXAMPLE 6.6.–
LCM(24, 36)?
There is a very simple relationship between the GCD and the LCM of two
natural integers a and b:
THEOREM 6.8.–
GCD(a, b)×LCM(a, b) = a × b.
This relationship is very useful because it allows the calculation of the
LCM of a number from its GCD with another number, or vice versa,
without the need to directly perform the decomposition into prime factors.
To prove this property, the analysis focuses on the exponents of prime
factors in number decompositions. Consider p as any prime number. Let g
represent the exponent of p in the prime factorization of a, and h the
exponent of p in the prime factorization of b. The exponent of p in the
prime factorization of (a × b) is therefore (g + h).
Let u = GCD(a, b). The exponent of p in the prime factorization of u is
denoted as e, where e = min(g, h). Define v = LCM(a, b). The exponent of p

in the prime factorization of v is denoted as f, where f = max(g, h).
Consequently, the exponent of p in the prime factorization of (u × v) is (e +
f).
If g ≥ h, then (e + f) = (h + g); if g ≤ h, then (e + f) = (g + h). In either
scenario, (e + f = g + h). This implies that the exponent of p remains
consistent between the prime factorization of (a × b) and (u × v). Due to the
uniqueness of prime decomposition, it follows that (a × b) = (u × v).
EXAMPLE 6.7.–
Let a = 12 and b = 18. The GCD(12,18) = 6. Using the relation,
theLCM can be calculated as follows:
So, in this example, the LCM of 12 and 18 is equal to 36.
6.5. Congruencies
Modulo division is complex but involves the use of modulus. Modulo
division is defined as follows:
DEFINITION.–
Let a and b be two integers and n be an integer greater than or equal to
2. The operation a ≡ b [n] is called a congruence of module n (read as
“a is congruent to b modulo n”). This operation means that the
Euclidean division of a by n gives a quotient q and the remainder b.
Formally, this is expressed as: a = q × n + b, and
Additionally, n divides a − b since a − b = q × n.

EXAMPLE 6.8.–
To illustrate congruence modulo n, consider the example involving the
number 28. Since 28 = 3 × 9 + 1, then 28 ≡ 1 [3] or even 28 ≡ 1 [9].
Verify that 3 divides 28 − 1 = 27 and that 9 divides 28 − 1 = 27.
THEOREM 6.9.–
For a fixed n, the congruence a ≡ b [n] is an equivalence relation in ℤ.
Recall that an equivalence relation ℛ is a map having the properties of
reflexivity, symmetry and transitivity:
For congruence, an equivalence relation a ≡ b [n] is a relationship that
satisfies the properties of reflexivity, symmetry and transitivity:
Reflexivity: a ≡ a [n] means that a can be expressed in the form a = q ×
n + a, where q = 0.
Symmetry: a ≡ b[n] means that a can be expressed in the form a = q ×
n + b. The equation can also be written as b = (−q) × n + a, which
shows that b ≡ a [n].
Transitivity: if a ≡ b [n] and b ≡ c [n], it means that a can be expressed
as a = p × n + b and b can be expressed as b = q × n + c. Substituting
the second equation into the first one, a = (p + q) × n + c is obtained,
which shows that a ≡ c [n].
Thus, the congruence relation satisfies the properties of reflexivity,
symmetry and transitivity, making it an equivalence relation.

EXAMPLE 6.9.–
If n = 3, the following three disjoint sets, called equivalence classes, can
be found:
E0 = {…, -3, 0, 3, 6, 9, …}
E1 = {…, -2, 1, 4, 7, 10, …}
E2 = {…, -1, 2, 5, 8, 11, …}
E3 = {…, 0, 3, 6, 9, 12, …} = E0
Addition and multiplication “modulo n” can be defined. Let, for example, a
≡ b[n] and a′ ≡ b′[n]. So:
Indeed, a = p × n + b and a′ = q × n + b′ therefore, a + a′ = (p + q) × n + b +
b′ or a + a′ ≡ b + b′ [n].
Likewise, a × a′ = (p × n + b)(q × n + b′) = (p × q + b × q + b′ × p)n + b × b’
or a × a′ ≡ b × b′ [n].
THEOREM 6.10.–
(Fermat’s Little Theorem): let a be an integer and n be a prime number.
1. an ≡a[n].
2. if n and a are coprime (GCD(a,n)=1, then an−1 ≡1[n].
The above theorem 6.10 was stated by Fermat who, perhaps, did not prove
it. The first known demonstrations are due to Euler and Leibnitz. It should
not be confused with Fermat’s “Great” Theorem (only proven in 1995 by
Andrew Wiles), which shows the impossibility of writing an + bn = cn with

a,b,c as positive integers and n > 2. The only valid relationship for n = 2 is
given by the Pythagorean theorem: a2 + b2 = c2.
Let us move on to the proof of the “Little” Theorem using induction. Note
that for a = 0, 0n = q × n + 0 (with q= 0), which is trivially congruent to
0[n]. Therefore, 0n = 0[n].
Assume the theorem is true for some integer a, i.e. an ≡ a[n]. Now, show
that (a+ 1)n ≡ (a + 1)[n].
Expand (a + 1)n Using Newton’s binomial formula:
by separating the first and last terms. The binomial coefficient has the
following expression:
The above expression shows that n divides 
 In the sum of 1 to n−1, 0
< k < n. It follows that n does not divide ! = 1.2.3… … k, so n divides 
The expansion of the binomial, as formulated above, can be written as:
Since n divides each term 
 for 1 ≤ k ≤ n −1, it follows that n divides (a
+ 1)n− an − 1, Which can be written as:
Given the induction hypothesis an ≡ a[n], its follows that:
This completes the induction step and hence the proof of Fermat’s Little
Theorem.

The second part of the theorem is deduced from the first. an ≡ a[n] can be
written as:
or even:
In this second part of the theorem, the additional hypothesis, a and n are
relatively prime, means that n does not divide a. Therefore, n divides an-1 −
1 which can be written as:

EXAMPLE 6.10.–
Fermat’s test: in the second part of Fermat’s Little Theorem, take a = 2.
Every prime number n is obviously coprime with 2. Therefore, 2n −1 ≡ 1
[n] according to Fermat, which means that 2n −1 −1 = q × n and that any
prime number n is a divisor of 2n−1 −1. Conversely, if a number n is not
a divisor of 2n−1 −1, it is not prime. This constitutes the “Fermat test”
which allows the determination of whether a number is prime or not.
So,
Is 3 prime? It is in fact a divisor of 22 −1 = 3, therefore prime.
Is 6 prime? 25 −1 = 31; 6 does not divide 31, so 6 is not prime.
Is 54321 prime? Calculation of 254320 − 1 is lengthy. Another
method similar to decimal-binary conversion is required.
Decompose 54320 according to the powers of 2 (see Figure 6.2):
So,
Next, perform the integer division of 254320 by 54321, or the division of
each factor 22i by 54321. According to the modulo multiplication rule,
compute the product of the remainders:

Figure 6.2. Decomposition into powers of 2
To calculate the remainders ri+1 of 22i+1 modulo 54321, ri+1 is derived
from ri the remainder of 22i, by squaring ri (i.e. 
) and taking modulo
54321. Such a process generates the following table:
20 = 1
the remainder of 21 by 54321 is
2
21 = 2
the remainder of 22 by 54321 is
4
22 = 4
the remainder of 24 by 54321 is
16
23 = 8
the remainder of 28 by 54321 is
256
24 = 16
the remainder of 216 by 54321 is
11215
25 = 32
the remainder of 232 by 54321 is
23110
26 = 64
the remainder of 264 by 54321 is
42349
27 = 128
the remainder of 2128 by 54321 is
29986
28 = 256
the remainder of 2256 by 54321 is
39004
29 = 512
the remainder of 2512 by 54321 is
52411
210 = 1024
the remainder of 21024 by 54321 is
8593
211 = 2048
the remainder of 21048 by 54321 is
17410
212 = 4096
the remainder of 24096 by 54321 is
51241
213 = 8192
the remainder of 28192 by 54321 is
34546

214 = 16384 the remainder of 216384 by 54321 is 48067
215 = 32768 the remainder of 232768 by 54321 is 1396
By considering the powers in the decomposition of 54320, it is found
that
Therefore, it is concluded that 54321 is not prime (it is divisible by 3).
Finding a prime factor of a large number can be challenging. For instance,
in the case of 54321 from the previous example, it is evident that 3 is a
prime factor. However, for a number such as 58483, by trying successive
prime numbers, it equals 233 × 251 after testing successive prime numbers
up to 233.
Consider the difficulty of factoring 114 381 825 757 888 867 669 235 779
976 146 612 010 218 296 721 242 362 562 561 842 935 706 935 245 733
897 830 597 123 563 958 705 058 989 075 147 599 290 026 979 543 541.
Good luck!
This challenge highlights the foundation of certain encryption systems.
Given primes p and q, their product Z = p × q is straightforward to
calculate. However, from Z, determining p and q is computationally
difficult. This characteristic forms the basis of the RSA (Rivest–Shamir–
Adleman) encryption system, which will be discussed in Chapter 8.
6.6. Elliptic curves
Fermat’s little theorem is well-known, but Fermat’s “big” theorem was only
demonstrated by Andrew Wiles in 1994. He used the properties of a family

of curves called elliptic curves. The details of this demonstration are not
covered here, but the focus is on the elliptic curves themselves.
In the family of elliptic curves, consider particularly the subfamily of
equations of the form y2 = x3 + ax + b, where a and b are integers such that
4a3 + 27b2 ≠ 0. The discriminant Δ = 4a3 + 27b2 is used to characterize
these curves. It allows the determination of properties of the roots of the
cubic equation x3 + ax + b. If Δ ≠0, the equation has no multiple roots. If Δ
< 0, the equation has three distinct real roots. Conversely, if Δ > 0, the
equation has only one unique real root.
The curves in this family display symmetry with respect to the x-axis (the
horizontal axis Ox). An example is the curve represented by the equation y2
= x3 − 5x + 3, where a = −5 and b = 3. This equation has a discriminant Δ =
−257.

Figure 6.3. Example of an elliptic curve
Figure 6.4. Another example of an elliptic curve
Figure 6.3 graphically shows the curve, highlighting its characteristic shape.
This curve consists of two components. With this family, curves with a

single component can also be found, such as the equation y2 = x3 − x + 2
(with discriminant Δ = 104), shown in Figure 6.4. These (elliptic) curves
possess remarkable properties. One of these properties concerns the so-
called addition operation between the points of the curve. Consider two
points A and B on the elliptic curve. Drawing a straight line passing through
these two points generally intersects the curve at a third point D. Let C be
the symmetric point of D with respect to the abscissa axis (horizontal axis
Ox). An addition operation between points A and B is defined as A + B = C.
This addition operation on elliptic curves has properties similar to those of
number addition:
It is commutative: A + B = B + A, regardless of the order of the points.
It is associative: (A + B) + C = A + (B + C), regardless of how the
points are grouped.
When the abscissa of points A and B are equal (xA = xB), the line AB
becomes parallel to the ordinate axis (Oy axis) due to the curve’s symmetry
with respect to Ox. In this case, the ordinate of point B is the negative of the
ordinate of point A (yB = -yA), and point D (and therefore point C) can be
considered to be at infinity, indicating that the line AB intersects the curve
at infinity. This specific point C is denoted as Ω. Therefore, in this case, A +
B = Ω, where B is considered the reflexion of A across the Ox axis.
Considering the line AΩ (a vertical line), it intersects thecurve at B, and
point C coincides with A, resulting in A + Ω = A. These observations lead
us to conclude the following:
Addition on elliptic curves has a neutral element denoted as Ω (the
“infinity” point), such that A + Ω = Ω + A = A.
Each point A has an “inverse” or “opposite” denoted as A′, such that A
+ A′ = Ω, where A′ is the opposite of A. Alternatively, A′ = -A.
Note that if points A and B coincide, line AB becomes tangent to the curve,
and A + A = 2A. This property is particular when points are repeated on the
curve.

The relations allowing the coordinates of a “sum” point to be found can be
analytically derived by solving the following system of equations, which
represents the intersection of a line AB with the elliptic curve:
where the second equation represents the line AB. Given the coordinates of
points A(xA, yA) and B(xB, yB), the coefficients c and d are deduced as
follows:
In the second case, where the line AB is tangent to the curve and points A
and B coincide:
In the general case, solving the system leads to a third-degree equation in x.
As two points of intersection (providing two roots of the equation), and
because a cubic equation has three roots, finding the third root gives the x-
coordinate of the desired point A+B:
Thus, the coordinates of point A + B are (x, −y).
Now, considering a bit of abstraction, replace the equation of the elliptic
curve C with an equation modulo p representing an (abstract) elliptic curve
Γ, where x and y are integers:

with 4a3 +27b2 ≠ 0 [p], which ensures that the point (x, y) belongs to Γ if x
and y satisfy the above equation. Here, all points of Γ no longer have any
relation to the previous “continuous” elliptic curves.
Let us outline the following rules of addition:
a. (xΩ + yΩ)+(xΩ, yΩ)=(xΩ, yΩ), where Ω is the “infinity” point.
b. (x,y)+ (xΩ, yΩ) = (x, y).
c. (x, y) + (x, −y) = (xΩ, yΩ) (x, −y) is thus the “opposite” point of (x, y).
d. For distinct points, (x1, y1) + (x2, y2) = (x3, y3) with
where k is defined by 
e. For points at the same location, (x1, y1) + (y1, y1) = 2(x1, y1) = (x3, y3)
with
where k is defined by 
The relationships observed here resemble those in the previous calculations
involving points of the elliptic curve (denoted as Γ). The main distinction is
that all operations are performed modulo a specific number. If two points
P1(x1, y1) and P2(x2, y2) are points on the elliptic curve Γ, then their sum P1
+ P2 also belongs on the curve Γ, based on the previous defined
relationships.
Moreover, this addition operation forms the basis for multiplying by an
integer n. Specifically, nP is obtained by adding P to itself n times: nP = P
+ P + …. + P (n times), where P is a point on the elliptic curve. The result
nP is likewise a point on the curve Γ.

EXAMPLE 6.11.–
Consider the curve Γ, given by y2 ≡ x3 + x + 2 [11].
If x = 2, then y2 ≡ x3 + x + 2 [11] ≡ 12 [11] ≡ 1[11]; therefore, y = 1 The
point (2,1) belongs to Γ.
Now, calculate (2,1) + (2,1) = 2(2,1) using the addition formulas:
Let us check that the point (8, 4) indeed belongs to Γ:
x3 + x + 2 ≡512 + 8 + 2 [11] ≡ 522 [11] ≡ 5[11] and y2 ≡ 16 [11] ≡ 5[11].
Therefore, the point (8,4) indeed belongs to Γ.
The two point (2,1) and (8,4) belong to Γ. Let us calculate (2,1) + (8,4)
= 3(2,1):
The values of the couple (x, y):
Let us check that the point (9, 7) indeed belongs to Γ:

x3 + x + 2 ≡2[11] ≡ 70[11] ≡ 4[11] and y2 ≡ 81[11] ≡ 4[11]
The point (4,9) = 3(2,1) belongs to Γ.
Now, determine how many points (x,y) are on the curve Γ. It is shown
that there exists a finite number between 
 and
. For this example where p = 12:
In fact, there are 16 points (including the infinite point Ω):
(2.1), (8.4), (2.10), (10.0),(8.7), (4.2),(4.9), (1.2),(5,0), (6.2), (7.0), (9.6),
(9.5), (1.9), (6.9) and Ω.
The graphical representation of the elliptic curve Γ, including the point
Ω, is shown in Figure 6.5. Note that the graphical representation of
elliptic curves with modulo operations differs significantly from the
curves used in calculations without modulo.

Figure 6.5. Graphical representation of the Γ curve
Figure 6.6 presents the addition of points on the elliptic curve Γ.
Figure 6.6. Addition table

What is the purpose of all this? Elliptic curves are particularly useful in
cryptography systems, a topic that will be covered in a future chapter.
6.7. Identity, theorem and Bézout algorithm
The following proposition is known as the Bézout identity or the Bézout–
Bachet theorem:
THEOREM 6.11.–
(Bézout identity) Let a and b be two non-zero integers. There exists a
pair (u, v) of integers such that GCD(a, b)= a × u + b × v.
Denote E as the set of non-zero natural integers of the form k × a + h × b,
where k, h ∈ ℕ and E ⊆ ℕ. Since a ∈ E, E is not empty and contains a
smallest element p such that p = a × u + b × v.
The GCD(a, b) divides both a and b; hence, it also divides p, implying that
GCD(a, b) ≤ p.
Performing the Euclidean division of a by p gives a = p × q + r with 0 ≤ r ≤
p. So,
If r ≠ 0, then r ∈ E. However, this contradicts the minimality of p in E
because r < p. Therefore, r = 0.
Thus, p divides a, and similarly, p divides both a and b, implying p ≤
GCD(a, b).
Since GCD(a, b) ≤ p and p ≤ GCD(a, b), then p = GCD(a,b) = a × u + b ×
v.
THEOREM 6.12. –
(Bézout’s theorem) a, b ∈ ℤ are relatively prime if and only if there
exist u, v ∈ ℤ such that a × u + b × v= 1.

If a and b are coprime, by definition, GCD(a, b) = 1. According to Bézout’s
identity, there exist integers u and v such that a × u + b × v = 1. Therefore, a
× u + b × v = 1.
Conversely, if there exist integers u and v such that a × u + b × v = 1, then
the GCD(a, b) divides both a and b. Therefore, it divides any linear
combination of a and b, including a × u + b × v. Since a × u + b × v = 1,
this implies that the GCD(a, b) divides 1.
Therefore, GCD(a, b) = 1 if and only if there exist integers u and v such that
a × u + b × v = 1. This establishes that a and b are relatively prime.
EXAMPLE 6.12.–
The numbers 28 and 27 are relatively prime. Integers u = 1 and v = −1
exist such that 28 × u + 27 × v = 28 − 27 = 1
Example 6.12 illustrates the use of Bézout’s algorithm to find the numbers u
and v, given the numbers a and b. This algorithm is used to compute the
GCD of two numbers and determine the Bézout coefficients. It proceeds
through a sequence of iterative steps
a, b integers
r = 0
u = 0
While r ≠
    u = u + 1
    m = au
    If b > 0
           r = m −E(m/b)n
    Otherwise
           r = m−E(m/b − 1)b
    EndIf
EndWhile
v = (1−m)/b

EXAMPLE 6.13.–
Consider the numbers a = 23 and b = 34.
Since 23 is a prime number and 34 is not a multiple of 23, the numbers
a and b are co-prime. Let us apply Bézout’s algorithm:
Performing successive steps:
Therefore, u = 3 and v = (1 − 69)/34 = −2
In fact, 3 × 23 − 2 × 34 = 1.
THEOREM 6.13.–
(Bézout’s Corollary) The equation a × x + b × y = c admits integer
solutions if and only if c is a multiple of GCD(a, b).
Suppose the equation a × x + b × y = c has a solution (x0, y0). Since GCD(a,
b) divides both a and b, it also divides their linear combination a × x0 + b ×
y0. Therefore, GCD(a, b) divides c, making c a multiple of GCD(a, b).
Conversely, suppose that c is a multiple of the GCD(a, b), say c = k ×
GCD(a, b) where k is an integer. Then, by Bézout’s identity, there exist
integers u and v such that a × u + b × v = GCD(a,b). Multiplying this
identity by k, the following result holds: k (a × u + b × v) = k × GCD(a, b) =
c. Thus, (x0, y0) = (k × u, k × v) is a solution satisfying a × x0 + b × y0 = c.

Therefore, the equation a × x + b × y = c has a solution if and only if c is a
multiple of the GCD(a, b). In such cases, (x0, y0), obtained using the
coefficients u and v of Bézout’s identity, provides a particular solution.
EXAMPLE 6.14.–
The equation 3x + 5y = 2 has integer solutions because GCD(3,5) = 1
and 2 is a multiple of 1
The equation 28x + 36y = 3 has no integer solution because
GCD(28,36) = 4 and 3 is not a multiple of 4.
THEOREM 6.14.–
(Gauss’ Theorem): for integers a, b, c, where a, b, c ∈ ℤ*, If a divides
b×c and if a and b are coprime (GCD(a,b) = 1), then a divides c.
If a divides b × c, then there exists an integer k such that k × a = b × c.
Now, suppose that a and b are coprime to each other, meaning GCD(a,b) =
1. According to Bézout’s theorem, there exist integers u and v such that a ×
u + b × v = 1. By multiplying this equality by c, the following equation
holds: c × a × u + c × b × v = c. Using the first relation (k × a = b × c) from
a previous relation, and by replacing c × b × v with k × a × v, it gives c × a
× u + k × a × v = c. Therefore, (c × u + k × v) × a = c. CConsequently, a
divides c because (c × u + k × v) is an interger.
THEOREM 6.15.–
Relationship between GCD and LCM: d = GCD(a,b) and m = LCM
(a,b)
1. There exist integers a′ and b′ such a = d × a′, b = d × b′, and
2. m × d = a × b.

7
Error Protection
CONCEPTS COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER.–
Nothing is more common than the accidental transformation of a 0 into
a 1, or vice versa, when transmitting information. The causes are
diverse. Regardless, it is essential to have ways to detect errors and, if
possible, correct them automatically. This is the subject of this chapter.
After discussing the general principles of error detection and correction
in binary sequences, linear codes are defined, where the bits of the
coded information are expressed linearly as a function of the useful
information bits and the control bits.
Current transmission methods use a variety of linear codes, including
polynomial codes. Their principle will be explained in a section
dedicated to them.
The chapter concludes with an overview of convolutional codes, which
involve temporal sequences of bits.
References: [BAD 02, LAH 95; MAC 87].
7.1. General context
It is well known that imperfections in transmission media result in noise,
which can cause a number of errors due to misinterpretation of signals. The
error rate is defined as the ratio between the number of erroneous bits and
the total number of bits transmitted, such that:

Depending on the media used, the error rate generally varies from 10−5 to
10−7. For many applications, this rate is still considered too high. Therefore,
it is necessary to provide a system for detecting and possibly correcting
errors.
Statistical studies have shown that 88% of errors are due to a single wrong
bit, while 10% of errors are due to two consecutive wrong bits. This
indicates that the main problem is the correction of “isolated” errors (an
erroneous bit occurring occasionally). However, to be more precise, an error
packet is defined according to the following convention: two successive
error bits belong to distinct error packets if the number of correct bits
separating them is greater than or equal to a fixed number N (generally N =
10, as shown in Figure 7.1).
Figure 7.1. Error packets
Figure 7.2 shows the statistical distribution of error packets as a function of
their length.

Figure 7.2. Distribution of error packets
It should be noted that less than 20% of packets have a length greater than
or equal to 3.
To protect against errors, a simple process is to first use the echoplex mode
(as shown in Figure 7.3). Such a mode consists of sending the received
message back to the transmitter. The comparison, at the transmitter level,
between the transmitted message that has been stored in memory and the
echo of the received message allows the detection of possible errors. Note
that echo transport can be prone to errors, even if the message received is
correct.
Figure 7.3. Echoplex mode
If there is a difference between the message sent and the echo of the
message received, the initial message will be retransmitted. Such a
technique is often used for small, low-speed transmissions. However, for
faster or larger transmissions, echoplex mode can become expensive and
reduce the effective throughput. An improvement involves sending two
successive blocks of information: the first block contains the information to
be transmitted, and the second one is a copy of the first block. The

verification is then performed at the receiver level. If the two blocks are
identical, it is assumed that there is no error. The receiver then sends a brief
acknowledgment signal to the transmitter. In the event of a discrepancy, the
receiver sends a non-acknowledgment signal to the transmitter, prompting it
to retransmit the information. However, such a method still involves
redundancy in transmitted information.
Figure 7.4. Encoding and decoding
A more effective solution is to use error detection codes. The principle of
such a code involves adding supplementary control information to the
useful information (see Figure 7.4). The receiver then decodes and
examines the control information to determine whether the information is
correct or erroneous. Upon detecting an error, a request to retransmit the
information is sent.
Two main categories of codes can be distinguished:
Block codes: in block codes, the control information and the useful
information form an autonomous block from the point of view of
detection and possibly correction of errors.
Convolutional or recurrent codes: these codes also operate with
blocks, but error detection and correction within a block are influenced
not only by the current block but also by preceding blocks.
Now, focusing on block codes, they are classified as systematic codes when
the useful information and the control information are grouped into separate
fields within the block, as shown in Figure 7.5.

Figure 7.5. Systematic code
Consider a set of m-bit words representing useful information, allowing for
a total of 2m distinct words. Introducing control information in the form of r
bits derived uniquely from the m useful bits, the resultant “encoded”
information contains n = m + r bits. Given the unique definition of the
control bits, there are 2m valid n bits words. However, with n bits, there are
2n different combinations of words. The difference, 2n – 2m, indicates the
number of erroneous words (see Figure 7.6).
Figure 7.6. Valid words and incorrect words
To avoid errors, it is advantageous for the 2m codewords to be maximally
distinct from each other. Such an approach prevents healthy codewords
from being transformed into other healthy codewords due to errors, thereby
ensuring effective error detection.
Generally speaking, the Hamming distance d(m1,m2) between two
codewords m1 and m2 is defined as the number of different bits of the same
rank by which they differ. For example, if m1 = 10110010 and m2 =
10000110, then d(m1,m2) = 3. The greater the Hamming distance between
two codewords, the easier it is to distinguish them. Specifically, if d(m1,m2)
= a, it takes a properly placed errors to transform m1 into m2.
For each code, it is important to define the minimum Hamming distance
dmin that allows the codewords to be sufficiently separated. Suppose that p
errors occur in a codeword. These p errors will be detected if dmin > p, i.e.
dmin ≥ p + 1. This establishes the primary rule to follow in the quest for
error detection and correction codes.

Figure 7.7. Rule R1
Rule R1: to detect p errors, it is necessary that dmin ≥ p + 1 (see Figure 7.7).
Thus, to detect simple errors (only one erroneous bit), dmin must be dmin ≥ 2.
Let us examine error correction up to an order q. Each codeword mi has a
sphere of influence where any erroneous codeword 
 (with 
) is considered to be mi. These spheres of influence must not touch or
overlap, necessitating that the minimum distance between any two
codewords be at least 2q + 1.
Figure 7.8. Rule R2
Rule R2: to correct errors up to order q, it is necessary that dmin ≥ 2q + 1
(see Figure 7.8).
Thus, correcting single errors (only one uncorrected bit) requires a code
with dmin ≥ 3.
Consider now the case where errors up to order p need detection, and errors
up to order q (where p > q) require correction. An erroneous codeword 
,
resulting from the introduction of q errors in a codeword mi, must not be
mistaken for a codeword mj such that 
. Therefore, it is
deduced that dmin must be greater than or equal to p + q + 1 to prevent
confusion between codewords.

Figure 7.9. Rule R3
Rule R3: to correct errors up to order q and detect errors up to order p
(where p > q), it is necessary that dmin ≥ p + q + 1 (see Figure 7.9).
7.2. Linear codes
A linear code is a systematic (n, m) block code in which the r = n − m
control bits depend linearly on the m bits of useful information:
with
The representation 
, where the are the ai
control bits. The following relationship therefore defines the code used:
where G is the code generating matrix. The structure of G is specified in
Figure 7.10.

Figure 7.10. Structure of the G matrix
The control bits are given by:
Figure 7.11. Structure of the H matrix
Consider the matrix H defined in Figure 7.11. H is constructed using the
transpose of the matrix g and the identity matrix. Calculate the matrix
product H. Y:

Since addition or subtraction modulo 2 are equivalent, the matrix H serves
as the parity check matrix.
EXAMPLE 7.1.–
Consider a code (6,3) whose matrices G and H are:
The codewords are therefore
000000 001110 010101 011011 100011 101101 110110 111000
It is evident that dmin = 3, thus allowing the correction of all single
errors and the detection of all double errors.

EXAMPLE 7.2.–
Let the code be (8,7) with H = [1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1]
The relation H.Y = 0 leads, with the modulo 2 operation, to a1 = x1 + x2
+ x3 + x4 + x5 + x6 + x7.
Figure 7.12. Parity bit
In this example, the bit a1 is known as the parity bit, and the codewords
have the characteristic of having an even number of 1. This allows 8-bit
characters to be represented using 7 bits for the ASCII code, with the eighth
bit being the parity bit. Note that the parity bit can be placed wherever
desired (see Figure 7.12).
With this system, if two characters in the ASCII code differ by only one bit,
they will also differ in the parity bit. Therefore, the minimum distance dmin
is equal to 2, which only allows the detection of simple errors.

Figure 7.13. VRC and LRC
However, it is possible to improve protection against errors by adding a
“longitudinal” parity check in addition to the “vertical” parity check
described previously (LRC: Longitudinal Redundancy Check; VRC:
Vertical Redundancy Check). Such a method consists of adding a control
character after every group of b blocks (see Figure 7.13).
Figure 7.14 shows the serial transmission of these blocks.
Figure 7.14. Serial transmission
With the addition of the VRC + LRC parity check method, groups of blocks
differing by just 1 useful information bit will also differ in VRC bit, LRC
bit and VRC + LRC bit. Consequently, the minimum distance dmin = 4
allows for the detection of single and double errors, as well as the
correction of single errors.
7.3. Polynomial codes
Polynomial codes are systematic linear codes commonly used in data
transmission for error detection, widely used in modern applications.
Consider an m-bit message X written as follows:

where the bit numbering used here is slightly different from before but
traditional in polynomial code applications. A polynomial X(z) is associated
with the message X:
For polynomial codes, used to represent binary data, allow these
polynomials to be added (modulo 2) and multiplied according to standard
algebraic rules. In a polynomial code, all codewords are represented by
polynomials Y(z) that are multiples of a generating polynomial H(z). This
type of code is known as linear and systematic because each polynomial
Y(z) can be expressed in the form:
where Q(z) is a polynomial whose degree is less than that of H(z) and
represents the message to be transmitted. The generator polynomial H(z) is
used for detecting and correcting transmission errors.
To transition from the useful information represented by the polynomial
X(z) to the coded information represented by the polynomial Y(z), a
polynomial code (n, m) is defined where r = n − m control bits are added.
The definitions are as follows:
 is the generator polynomial of
degree r.
The polynomial zrX(z) is of degree m + r — 1 = n − 1, containing n terms
where the first r terms are zero. Performing polynomial division zrX(z) by
H(z):
Here, R(z) is the remainder polynomial of degree r − 1. Since modulo 2
addition is equivalent to subtraction, it follows that:

Note that Y(z) represents the polynomial associated with the codeword,
which is of degree n − 1 and includes n terms.

EXAMPLE 7.3.–
Polynomial code (7,4) with generator polynomial H(z) = 1 + z+z3. The
useful information corresponds to the polynomial X(z) = x0 + x1z + x2z2
+ x3z3. Performing the division z3X(z) by H(z) yields the following
results (see Figure 7.15):
Figure 7.15. Division of z3X(z) by H(z)
Hence, the codeword is [x0 x1 x2 x3 a0 a1 a2] with
The generating matrix G of the code is deduced as follows:
Polynomial codes are widely used in telecomputing, with several well-
known examples:
CCITT V.41 code: the generating polynomial is H(z) = z16 + z12 + z5 +
1, used in the HDLC procedure.

CRC code 16: the generating polynomial is H(z) = z16 + z15 + z2 + 1,
used in the BSC procedure with EBCDIC coding.
CRC code 12: the generating polynomial is H(z) = z12 + z11 + z3 + z2 +
z + 1, used in the BSC procedure with 6-bit character coding.
ARPA code: the generating polynomial is H(z) = z24 + z23 + z17 + z16 +
z15 + z13 + z12 + z11 + z10 + z9 + z8 + z5 + z3 + 1.
Ethernet code: the generating polynomial is H(z) = z32 + z26 + z23 + z22
+ z16 + z12 + z11 + z10 + z8 + z7 + z5 + z4 + z2 + z + 1.
A significant subset of polynomial codes consists of cyclic codes. A
polynomial code (n, m) is cyclic if its generator polynomial H(z) divides zn
+ 1:
where Ω(z) is a polynomial of degree (n − m).
Cyclic codes possess a fundamental property that makes them particularly
advantageous: any circular shift (i.e. any circular permutation of bits) of a
codeword remains a valid codeword. This property greatly simplifies their
practical implementation and enhances their utility across various
telecommunications applications. Cyclic codes find widespread application
in wireless communication protocols such as Wi-Fi and Bluetooth.
7.4. Convolutional codes
A convolutional code, also known as a recurrent (n, m) code, encodes the
block based on the m bits of information in the block and the m − 1
previous bits or blocks.
Let us consider the example of the convolutional code (3,1) where 1 bit of
useful information corresponds to 3 bits of encoded data. The encoder is
shown in Figure 7.16, where the addition is performed using the “exclusive
or” operation, denoted by ⊕ (i.e. for which 1 ⊕ 1 = 0).

Figure 7.16. Convolutional code (3,1)
Thus, each transmitted bit xi gives rise to a triplet y1i, y2i, y3i. Errors can be
detected by calculating the values of xi, xi−1 and xi−2 (the latter two already
received) as functions of y1i, y2i, y3i, allowing for error checking.
The operation of convolutional coding can be represented in several ways:
a. Representation by tree diagram (see Figure 7.17). This representation
visualizes the various coding stages from useful information to the
codeword. It is well suited for convolutional codes, where nodes
represent encoder states and branches correspond to different possible
transitions based on input and output bits.

Figure 7.17. Tree diagram
b. Representation by state diagram (see Figure 7.18). This also visualizes
encoder states and explicitly shows transitions between states based on
input and output bits. Such a representation is particularly suitable for
convolutional codes.
Figure 7.18. State diagram
In Figure 7.18, the nodes correspond to the states of registers R1 and R2 (the
bits xi−1 and xi−2). The arcs correspond to the output states y1y2y3 depending
on whether a 0 or a 1 is input.
c. Representation by lattice diagram (see Figure 7.19). This diagram is
especially suitable for block type codes. It provides a visual

representation of all the processing steps performed on each block and
the various error correction procedures. Nodes within the lattice
represent distinct processing states, branches indicate potential
transitions based on input and output bits, and paths in the lattice
illustrate the specific processing steps applied to the blocks.
Figure 7.19. Lattice diagram
OceanofPDF.com

8
Encryption Systems
CONCEPTS COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER.–
Information protection is a concern for all users of binary information.
With the rise of website hacking, maintaining information
confidentiality has become crucial. This chapter explains the main
methods of data encryption.
Following a review of the standard methods of substitution and
transposition, two contemporary systems will be detailed: the DES
(Data Encryption Standard) system with a secret key and the RSA
(Rivest–Shamir–Adleman) system with a public key, highlighting the
use of prime numbers in the latter.
The method of elliptic curves will be introduced, building on Chapter 6
on arithmetic.
Finally, the potential of the quantum computer will be discussed, along
with an overview of encryption methods based on quantum mechanics.
References: [BEL 94, GHE 08, GOM 13, INA 99, LEH 19, LOV 91,
SIN 99].
8.1. Substitution and transposition
Encryption consists of transforming plain text into indecipherable text
(cipher text) using an algorithm and an encryption key. The opposite
operation is decryption, which recovers the plain text from the cipher text
using the corresponding decryption key. Generally speaking, two keys are
needed in a symmetric encryption system, one for encryption (encryption
key) and one for decryption (decryption key), as shown in Figure 8.1.

Figure 8.1. Schema of an encryption system
If the key K1 is equal to the key K2 (i.e. K1 = K2), the encryption system is
called classic or single key. This means that a single key is used for both
encryption and decryption of data.
On the contrary, if the key K1 is different from the key K2 (i.e. K1 ≠ K2),
the encryption system is called a key pair. In this case, one key (K1) is used
for data encryption and another separate key (K2) is used for decryption.
EXAMPLE 8.1.–
Construction of a key: choice of a particular word (see Figure 8.2.)
Figure 8.2. Encryption table
As shown in Figure 8.2, the cipher alphabet starts with the key
“juliscaer”, followed by the remaining unused letters in alphabetical
order starting from “r”. Using this cipher alphabet, the French sentence
“le ciel est bleu”1 can be encrypted.
There are two main basic techniques in the field of encryption: the
substitution method and the transposition method.

The substitution method: involves replacing each character or group of
characters in plain text with another character or group of characters
according to a predefined rule. For example, in monoalphabetic
substitution encryption, each letter of the plain text is replaced by a
corresponding letter of the alphabet according to a fixed
correspondence. This method can be done symmetrically with a single
key for encryption and decryption, or asymmetrically with two
separate keys.
The transposition method: involves reorganizing the order of the
characters in the plain text without modifying them. For example, in
transposition encryption, letters in the plain text are rearranged
according to a specific rule, sometimes using a matrix or key to
determine the order of permutation. This method does not change the
characters themselves but makes the cipher text more difficult to
understand without knowledge of the transposition method used.
8.2. Substitution methods
8.2.1. Replacement of a symbol by a symbol
Encrypting a text involves replacing each symbol (or character in the plain
text) with another symbol (or character) according to a specific rule.
Caesar’s code, also known as shift encryption, is a historical encryption
method attributed to Julius Caesar. According to the tradition reported by
Suetonius, such a method involves shifting each letter of the plain text three
positions to the right in the alphabet.
Figure 8.3. Caesar’s code
In a “modern” version of shift encryption, the ASCII code of a character is
adjusted by a fixed “offset”, also referred to as a key. The resulting value is
then reduced modulo the size of the alphabet.

EXAMPLE 8.2.–
Adding 3 to the ASCII code (see Figure 8.4) to encrypt the French word
“ordinateur”2
Figure 8.4. ASCII code offset
An important cryptographic tool is frequency analysis. By analyzing a large
number of texts, the frequency of appearance of different letters is
determined. For French texts, the results are shown in Figure 8.5.

Figure 8.5. Frequency analysis for French texts
EXAMPLE 8.3.–
Let the following French text be decoded (see Figure 8.6)

Figure 8.6. The text to decipher
Count the letters in this text (see Figure 8.7). By using statistics derived
from the frequency of letters in French texts, a correspondence can be
established between the letters of the alphabet and their probability of
appearance. Figure 8.8 displays a list of letters from the French
alphabet, arranged according to their average probability of appearance.
Figure 8.7. Number of appearances of letters in the encrypted text
Figure 8.8. Probable encryption

Figure 8.9. First replacements
Start by replacing K and G with E and A, resulting in Figure 8.9.
Some words contain doubled letters such as ARREINE. In French, RR
can correspond to CC, FF, LL, MM, NN, PP, RR, SS, TT, etc. Since L is
statistically closest to R, consider replacing R with L (if this does not
work, other options can be explored!).
This substitution results in LE3, a common article in French, appearing
multiple times, indicating a promising direction.
Similarly, for the word RAOYYE, which becomes LAOYYE after
substitution, we could consider Y → N, but no fitting word comes to
mind. The same applies to Y → T or Y → R which also do not seem
appropriate. However, Y → S would yield LAOSSE, suggesting the
word LAISSE4 (any other suggestion?), which implies O → I.

In statistics, S corresponds to M.
Figure 8.10. Deciphering attempts
The text of Figure 8.10 is obtained similarly. The first word is MAIZXE
with the unknown letters Z and X. A dictionary search can yield the
candidate MAITRE5, which implies Z → T and X → R,
correspondences close to statistics.

Figure 8.11. Text almost deciphered
A word such as METTIR is probably MENTIR6; hence, T → N, also
close in statistics. Likewise, the word RENARJ is certainly RENARD7;
hence, J → D. Also, the word MUNSIEAR should be MONSIEUR8;
hence, U → O and A → U. The text of Figure 8.11 is obtained similarly.
From there, it is no longer very difficult to decipher the text:
IOHEAU must be CORBEAU9; therefore, I → C and H → B. From
this, EIOUTE → ECOUTE10 is deduced.
LROMAME must be FROMAGE11; hence, L → F and M → G. From
this, LANMAME → LANGAGE12 is deduced.
VLUMAME must be PLUMAGE13, from which V → P. Therefore,
VROY → PROIE14, etc.

Finally, the text to decipher is the fable “Le corbeau et le renard”15 by
Jean de La Fontaine (see Figure 8.12). See the appendix for the
translation.
Figure 8.12. Plain text

Figure 8.13. Vigenère code
Vigenère code (Blaise de Vigenère, Traité des chiffres ou secrètes manières
d’écrire16, 1586) is a famous substitution type of cipher. It is defined by the
matrix in Figure 8.13.
Using the key “MIAGE” and the text to encrypt, the French text “Le ciel est
bleu, la mer est verte”17 is arranged as shown in Figure 8.14.
Figure 8.14. Correspondence table
The gray lines in Figure 8.15 correspond to the letters of the key (second
column) and define the substitution.

Figure 8.15. Vigenère table
Therefore, the ciphertext in Figure 8.16 is obtained.
Figure 8.16. Text encryption
Note that this method solves the problem of frequency analysis.
Another interesting encryption method worth noting is based on modulo
calculation, known as the Hill cipher. This technique uses a key represented
by a 2 × 2 matrix and segments the message into blocks of two letters. If the
total number of letters is odd, the last block is completed with the “@”
symbol.
To illustrate this method, here is an example.

EXAMPLE 8.4.–
Consider the key matrix K as well as its inverse K−1, ensuring that the
determinant of K is non-zero, which guarantees the existence of the
inverse:
Implement the following correspondence between the letters of the
alphabet and numbers, as shown in Figure 8.17.
Figure 8.17. Letter–number matching
To encrypt the word “INFORMATION”, apply the correspondence
shown in Figure 8.18.
Figure 8.18. Matching for key
Divide the message into pairs of two numbers: (8, 13), (5, 14), (17, 12),
(0, 19), (8, 14), (13, 26).
Consider these pairs of numbers as the components of a vector and
apply the matrix K to these components to perform the encryption:

The matrix K−1 allows the text to be deciphered and the initial message
to be found.
Note that there are many variations of this method. For example, instead
of grouping letters into pairs, they can be grouped into packs of n
letters, requiring a corresponding key (n × n).
8.2.2. The code: replacement of a word by a word
Instead of simply replacing one symbol with another symbol, it is also
possible to take a more holistic approach by replacing one word with
another word. Thus, while the first method is known as cipher, the second
method is called code (or coding).
To implement the coding method, it is necessary to create a correspondence
table beforehand.

EXAMPLE 8.5.–
Either code the following French text:
IL ÉTAIT UNE FOIS UNE MARCHANDE DE FOIE QUI VENDAIT
DU FOIE DANS LA VILLE DE FOIX. ELLE ME DIT, MA FOI, C’EST
LA PREMIÈRE FOIS QUE JE VENDS DU FOIE DANS LA VILLE DE
FOIX18.
A practical illustration of the lookup table can be found in Figure 8.19,
which shows the mappings used in the code. By excluding punctuation
marks and spaces, the message is simplified as follows:
B2F6I9VWI9TUGHD4MN11KLD412Z0EFGHXYH8E510C3VWAB
OPZ0QRVWG7A111KLD412Z0EFGHXY.
Figure 8.19. The code
The encryption key is then a kind of dictionary.
8.3. Transposition methods
The text to be encrypted is divided into blocks of fixed size (e.g. eight
characters). Suppose the key K1 = 71265843, which specifies that the first
character of the block is placed at position 7 in the encrypted block, the
second at position 1, etc. Following this approach, encryption proceeds for
the following French text:
VIVE L’INFORMATIQUE19 becomes IVI’EVLFOITMRNAUE Q

The decryption key is K2 = 23875416.
The process can be further refined, as in the “Lucifer” method developed by
IBM and based on the Feistel structure. To illustrate this method, consider
the following example.

EXAMPLE 8.6.–
To code the letter J in extended ASCII (see Figure 8.20).
Figure 8.20. ASCII code of J
The Lucifer method involves several phases (see Figure 8.21). These
operationsare then repeated several times (see Figure 8.22).

Figure 8.21. Basic operation
Figure 8.22. Iterations

The process is reversible given the permutation key.
8.4. Asymmetric systems
Asymmetric systems use a key pair consisting of a public key and a private
key. However, securely transmitting these keys between involved parties
poses a challenge.
A solution to this problem is provided by the Bell–Hellman algorithm,
developed in 1976. To illustrate its operation, consider two correspondents,
A and B, as shown in Figure 8.23.
Figure 8.23. Communication between A and B
Suppose, as shown in Figure 8.24, that correspondents A and B have
knowledge of a function f(x) = 7 x [11], which forms part of the public key.
Obviously, a potential intruder may also possess knowledge of this
function.
Figure 8.24. Communication between A and B (continued)
A and B now hold secret key 9.
An intruder possessing the values 2 and 4 faces a significant challenge in
solving the equations 7y ≡ 2 [11] and 7z ≡ 4 [11] to find y = 3 and z = 6.
Reversing the “modulo” function is indeed extremely difficult.

8.5. DES – secret key system
Classical methods combine substitution and transposition. Two well-known
methods are DES (Data Encryption Standard), standardized by the National
Bureau of Standards since 1977, and RSA (Rivest–Shamir–Adleman),
which will be discussed later.
DES is a standardized method where text is divided into 64-bit blocks and a
64-bit key is used. The encryption process is shown in Figure 8.25.
The encryption (encoding) key K generates, as discovered later, 16
secondary keys used in the encryption process. IP and IP-1 are permutation
operations defined by the tables shown in Figure 8.26.
The IP operation repositions the 58th bit as the first bit, the 50th bit as the
second, etc. Similarly, the IP-1 inverse operation ensures that the first bit of
the result corresponds to the 40th bit, the second bit of the result
corresponds to the 8th, etc.
The function f is defined according to the schema in Figure 8.27.
The function f(R, K) involves several essential operations: operation E,
which converts a 32-bit block into a 48-bit block; operations S1–S8, which
transform 6-bit groups into 4-bit groups according to Figure 8.29; and the
permutation P, which acts on a 32-bit block. These operations are detailed in
Figure 8.28.

Figure 8.25. Encryption process
Figure 8.26. IP and IP−1 swap (permutation operation)

Figure 8.27. Definition of function f
Figure 8.28. Operations E and P
The first bit of E(R) corresponds to bit 32, the second bit corresponds to bit
1, etc. As for the P permutation, the first bit corresponds to bit 16, the
second bit to bit 7, etc.
To illustrate the operation of the S-boxes:
Take an input sextet of 101100 for SI.
Separate the first bit (1) and the last bit (0).

Concatenate them to get 10 (equivalent to 2 in decimal).
The remaining four bits, 0110, represent the decimal number 6.
Figure 8.29. Operations S1–S8
Referring to the intersection of row 2 and column 6 of matrix S1 (rows and
columns being numbered starting from 0), the value obtained is 2,
represented as 0010 in 4 bits.
Consequently, the sextet 101100 transforms into 0010, as shown in Figure
8.30.
Figure 8.30. Transformation of sextet 101100
The keys are generated on 48 bit keys from the starting key K by following
the process described below, involving operations PC-1 (initial
permutation) and PC-2 (final permutation) according to the schema in
Figure 8.31 (known as Permuted Choice: PC).

Detailed definitions of PC-1 and PC-2 are provided in Figure 8.32.
For PC-1: the bits of the key (KEY) are numbered from 1 to 64. The
bits of C0 correspond to bits 57, 49, 41, 33, … of KEY, while the bits
of D0 correspond to bits 63, 55, 47, 39, … of KEY.
For PC-2: the first bit of each Ki key is the 14th bit of CiDi, and the
second bit of Ki is the 17th bit of CiDi.
For left shifts: the shifts are circular, meaning the outgoing bit on the
left is reintroduced to the right. The number of shifts varies for each
key, as shown in the table in Figure 8.33.

Figure 8.31. PC-1 and PC-2
Figure 8.32. Definition of PC-1 and PC-2
Figure 8.33. Number of offsets based on key number
Criticism of DES includes its key length, which is 64 bits (effectively 56
bits due to 8 bits being used for parity). This relatively short length allows
attackers to potentially guess the key by trying successive combinations of

the 56-bit. While this process may take time, advancements in computer
performance make it increasingly feasible. For instance, a demonstration by
John Gilmore in January 1999 showed that it was possible to find a DES
key in 22 hours and 15 minutes using a machine costing $250,000. Due to
these vulnerabilities, DES is being phased out in favor of other systems
such as IDEA (International Data Encryption Algorithm), which use 64-bit
blocks and 128-bit keys, offering significantly enhanced security.
8.6. RSA – public key system
The principle of RSA encryption relies on a double key (or dual-key)
system: an encryption key, known as the public key and shared openly, and
a decryption key, kept confidential.
Consider the scenario of two correspondents, Alice and Bob, who wish to
exchange messages securely (that cannot be deciphered by a hacker). Alice
possesses a key pair consisting of a public key and a private key. She shares
her public key with Bob while retaining her private key.
Bob receives Alice’s public key and uses it to encrypt his message. He then
sends the encrypted message to Alice. Alice, possessing the corresponding
private key, decrypts the message.
The encryption system, based on asymmetric cryptography, was developed
by Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir and Leonard Adleman in 1977.
To understand the method used, consider the following facts:
1. There exists a quick algorithm for determining whether a large integer
is prime. This algorithm is based on Fermat’s little theorem, which
states that if p is a prime number, there exists a number n less than p (n
< p) such that np–1 ≡ 1[p]. For a number with 130 digits, this
verification can be performed in a few minutes on a modern machine.
2. Conversely, there is no efficient algorithm for determining the prime
factors of a large non-prime integer. For instance, factoring a product
of two prime numbers, each with 63 digits, would require an estimated
calculation time of approximately 40,000,000,000,000,000 years on a
contemporary computer (as of 1999).

The RSA encryption method involves the following steps:
a. Randomly choosing two distinct large prime numbers, p and q, each of
about 100 digits. Calculating the product r = p × q.
b. Randomly choosing a large integer e that is coprime with (p – 1) × (q –
1). This integer e becomes the encryption key.
c. Determining the decryption key d such that d.e ≡ 1 [(p – 1)(q – 1)].
d. Making the values of r (the modulus) and e (the public encryption
exponent) public, but keeping the value of d (the private decryption
exponent) secret.
e. Encrypting a message P by calculating C ≡ Pe[r].
f. Decrypting an encrypted message C by calculating P ≡ Cd[r].
EXAMPLE 8.7.–
(deliberately simple) p = 3, q = 5, r = 15
(p - 1).(q - 1) = 8, e = 11 (prime number greater than p and q)
d.11 ≡ 1 [8], hence d = 3 by performing the “modulo” division
Publication of r = 15 and e = 11
P = 13; encryption: C ≡ 1311 [15] ≡ 1 792 160 394 037 [15] = 7
Decryption: P ≡ 73 [15] ≡ 343 [15] = 13
An interesting application of the public key system is message signing.
Consider the example where Alice (A) sends an RSA encrypted message to
Bob (B).
CPA: public key of A for encryption (used by others to encrypt
messages to B).
CPB: public key of B for encryption (used by others to encrypt
messages to B).
CSA: secret key of A for decryption (used by A to decrypt messages).

CSB: secret key of B for decryption (used by B to decrypt messages).
When sending a message P from A to B, it is important that B can verify the
authenticity of the sender, ensuring that the message truly originates from
A. Here is how this verification process works:
1. Instead of directly encrypting P with CPB (public key of B), A first
applies her secret key CSA to P, and then encrypts the result with CPB:
C = CPB(CSA(P)).
2. B receives the encrypted message C. He then applies his secret key
CSB to C, followed by applying the public key CPA of A to verify the
authenticity: CPA(CSB(C)) = CPA(CSB(CPB(CSA(P)))) =
CPA(CSA(P)) = P.
Therefore, B can be confirmed that the message originated from A (see
Figure 8.34).
Figure 8.34. Message signature
8.7. Cryptography with elliptic curves
Traditionally, when Alice (A) and Bob (B) wish to communicate securely
over a telecommunications network, they use a system involving public and
private keys.
In this system, there exists a public key that is accessible to all users on the
network, and also a private key known only by Alice and Bob.

The public key is used to encrypt messages before transmission over the
network. If an interceptor were to capture the message, they would be
unable to decrypt it without the corresponding private key.
Conversely, the private key is used by Alice and Bob to decrypt the
received messages. Only Alice and Bob possess this key and can therefore
read the messages intended for them.
In their setup:
Alice and Bob agree upon an “abstract” elliptic curve Г:
where x and y are integers modulo p, and p being a prime number.
They select a specific point P(x0, y0) that belongs to this curve Г.
The elliptic curve Г and the point P constitute their public key, which can be
potentially be intercepted by a spy.
To establish a common secret key, Alice chooses an integer nA and Bob
chooses an integer nB. However, they do not communicate these integers to
each other directly to protect them against interception.
Alice sends Bob the point (nA · P), where P is the agreed-upon point on the
curve Г. Similarly, Bob sends Alice point (nB · P). Since nB(nA · P) = nA(nB ·
P) = (nA · nB) · P, Alice and Bob can independently calculate the common
secret key (nA · nB) · P. This shared secret key is also a point on the elliptic
curve Г
When Alice wants to transmit a “point” message M, which can be
represented by a point on the elliptic curve, she sends to Bob the point M +
(nA · nB) · P. Bob can then subtract (nA · nB) · P from the message received:
Thus, Bob can decrypt the message.

A spy (Eve) can intercept the points nAP and nBP, but it is difficult for her to
deduce the common secret key (nAnB)P needed for decryption, because she
knows neither nA nor nB. This is due to the difficulty of solving the discrete
logarithm problem, which involves finding k in the equation P′ = kP.
Although an algorithm for solving this problem is known, it becomes
impractical when the numbers used are very large. Therefore, it is better to
choose a large p to strengthen system security.
8.8. Quantum cryptography
To decrypt messages encrypted with advanced encryption methods such as
RSA, very powerful computers are required. Even with today’s computers,
based on the Von Neumann architecture, deciphering encrypted messages
remains a complex challenge. The Japanese supercomputer Fugaku
considered the most powerful computer in the world as of 2021 (see:
https://en.wikipedia.org), displays an impressive performance of 442
PetaFlops. This means it can perform 442.1015 floating point operations per
second (peta = 1 million trillion). Although this computing power is
extremely high, it alone would not be sufficient to quickly decrypt messages
encrypted using methods such as RSA.
The new generation of computers will undoubtedly be that of quantum
computers. In a “classic” computer, calculations are done on bits (0 or 1).
On the contrary, the quantum computer uses qubits, which are quantum
elements capable of existing in a superposition of states 0 and 1.
Consequently, the quantum computer, which processes qubits and therefore
simultaneously handles states 0 and 1, offers potentially much higher
computing power than conventional computers. The concept of a quantum
computer is not new; it was first formulated by David Deutsch in 1985.
Since then, research and development in this area has progressed
significantly, with major advances in manipulating qubits, correcting
quantum errors, and making working prototypes of quantum computers.
Consider the following example (S. Singh) to illustrate the concept. The
goal is to find a number x such that x2 and x3 together contain all the
integers from 0 to 9. Imagine taking the numbers from 0 to 127 as the
search range. A classical computer, working bitwise, must examine each

number from 0000000 (0 in decimal) to 1111111 (127 in decimal) to see if it
meets the search criterion. It will therefore have to perform 128 operations
to explore all the numbers, which will take a “certain” time. The quantum
computer, on the contrary, will examine all 128 possibilities in a single
operation and give the answer: 69 (since 692 = 4761 and 693 = 328509, and
all the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 are present).
In the case of decrypting a message encrypted with RSA, finding the prime
factors of a large number is an essential step. For a classical computer, it
would take about 10200 operations to find the prime factors of a 10,000-bit
number. In contrast, a quantum computer could perform this task in just
1010 operations.
In 1994, Peter Shor proposed a revolutionary algorithm that allows a
quantum computer to solve the factorization problem in polynomial time.
This means that a quantum computer could effectively decipher messages
encrypted with RSA by finding the prime factors of the modulo used.
Similarly, in 1996, Lov Grover proposed a quantum algorithm for searching
for a particular element in an unsorted list. This opens up the possibility of
quickly finding a message encrypted with DES by searching the space of
possible keys. It is important to note that although these theoretical
advances were made several decades ago, the practical realization of a
quantum computer capable of running these algorithms remains a major
technological challenge. Current quantum computers have limitations in
their ability to manipulate and correct qubits, and they are still far from
reaching a scale large enough to compete with classical computers in real-
world applications.
With the advent of the quantum computer, the use of quantum cryptography
will become essential to ensure secure communications. The foundations of
quantum cryptography date back to the 1960s, where innovative concepts
were introduced, such as quantum currency proposed by Simon Wiesner.
Quantum currency is a concrete example of the application of quantum
cryptography. It is based on the use of photon polarization, which makes it
possible to create tamper-proof banknotes (see Figure 8.35). The idea is that
each quantum currency banknote is associated with a specific polarization
of photons, which can be detected and verified by quantum protocols.

Figure 8.35. $1 banknote according to Wiesner
A photon, as a particle of light, possesses both a corpuscular and a wave
nature. From the wave point of view, the propagation of a photon is
associated with the propagation of an electromagnetic wave. The electric
and magnetic fields of this wave lie in a plane perpendicular to the direction
of propagation (as shown in Figure 8.36).
The polarization of a photon refers to the orientation of the electric field E
(or magnetic field B, since the two are perpendicular to each other) during
its propagation. A photon is said to be polarized when the direction of its
electric (or magnetic) field remains constant throughout its path. On the
contrary, a non-polarized photon would have a field direction that varies
during propagation.
Figure 8.36. Polarized photon
Now imagine photons polarized in four different orientations, for example,
E at 0°, 45°, 90° and 135°. Using a filter in the form of a slit placed at 0°,
the results shown in Figure 8.37 are obtained, depending on the initial
polarization of the photons. The fraction of photons that pass through the
filter is proportional to cos2(θ), where θ is the angle between the
polarization of the incident photon and the direction of the slit.
If the filter indicates that nothing passes, this means that the incident
photons are polarized at 90°. However, in other cases, the filter does not
allow determination of the exact polarization of the incident photons (as
shown in Figure 8.37).

Figure 8.37. Different scenarios
The banknote proposed by Wiesner included 20 “photon traps” designed to
preserve the polarization of the photon placed there. Each photon was
polarized in one of four different orientations, giving a total of 420
possibilities, or about 1012 possibilities. Thus, there were numerous
variations of different banknotes. The bank was aware of the
correspondence between the serial number of the note, for example,
BXY1234Z, and the polarization configuration of the photons it contained.
By using specific filters adjusted for each photon, the bank could determine
whether a banknote was counterfeit. For example, if for photon n, the filter
was set to 0° and the predicted polarization of the photon was also at 0°, the
bank could conclude that the banknote was fake if nothing passed through
the filter.
Charles Bennett (who knew Wiesner) and Gilles Brassard took Wiesner’s
idea and developed a method of quantum cryptography known as BB84.
This method exploits the transmission of polarized photons to ensure
communication security. When transmitting polarized photons, two coding
schemas can be used:
The “ + ” diagram, where the photons are polarized at 0°(1) and at
90°(0) (see Figure 8.38).

Figure 8.38. “ + ”schema
The “ × ” diagram, where photons are polarized at 45°(1) and 135°(0)
(see Figure 8.39).
Figure 8.39.“ × ” schema
Suppose Alice wants to send the message “10010111” to Bob using specific
coding schemes for each bit (see Figure 8.40).
Figure 8.40. Coding schemas
Bob has a filter that he can orient in one of four possible positions (0°, 45°,
90°, 135°). When each bit of the message arrives, Bob randomly chooses a
polarization for his filter.
When a photon arrives, three situations are possible:
1. Alice and Bob chose the same polarization. In this case, the sent bit
and the received bit are the same, and Bob can determine the value of
the bit unambiguously.
2. Alice and Bob chose perpendicular polarizations. In this situation, Bob
does not detect any photons. He deduces that the photon sent is
polarized perpendicular to the direction of his filter.
3. Alice and Bob chose polarizations that are 45° apart (in either
direction). In this case, Bob does receive a photon, but he cannot
determine the original polarization with certainty.
Imagine that Bob has two detectors (filters), one following the “ + ” schema
and the other following the “ × ” schema. With these two detectors, he can
receive the correct message. However, a photon is indivisible; it cannot be
split in two to pass through each detector separately.

If Alice sends Bob the sequence of schemas used (the secret key) for each
sent photon polarization, Bob can then receive the message in clear text.
However, a spy (Eve, in the literature) who knows the sequence of patterns
used by Alice for each bit will also be able to intercept it. The entire issue
thus revolves around the secure transmission of the secret key, a persistent
challenge in the key distribution. Of course, methods such as RSA could be
used, but with the advent of quantum computers, RSA will become
obsolete.
Bennett and Brassard’s method is based on three preparatory steps to secure
the transmission of quantum keys:
Step 1: Alice sends a random sequence of 0s and 1s using photons with
arbitrary patterns.
Step 2: Bob randomly applies filters following the “+” and “ × ” schemas,
which can result in correct or incorrect interpretations. The possible
outcomes are detailed in the table in Figure 8.41.
Step 3: after transmitting a certain number of bits, Alice communicates with
Bob over an open channel, typically by telephone, to reveal the sequence of
patterns she used. However, she does not reveal the actual bits transmitted
(see Figure 8.42). This step allows Bob to verify the accuracy of his
interpretations.
The result is shown in Figure 8.43.

Figure 8.41. Table of possible options
Figure 8.42. Various situations
The last line in Figure 8.43 provides the list of “good” bits, which in this
case is 10011110. The rest of the bits are rejected. This list, which has not
been openly communicated, forms the key for the next message. A spy
(Eve) attempting to intercept the list of bits sent by Alice would mimic

Bob’s actions but would not achieve the same outcome. Due to using
different filters, the spy cannot determine which bits were discarded and
therefore cannot obtain the key.
Figure 8.43. Synthesis
Basically, interception by a spy involves examining the transmitted photon,
drawing a conclusion and then sending it back to Bob. However, a photon
that has been observed is inevitably altered!
Let us therefore assume the sequence of bits intended to establish the key
proceeds without interference. When the actual message is subsequently
sent, if a spy attempts to intercept it, they will alter the polarization of the
photon. Bob will detect this alteration as an error. This would inform Bob
that the transmission has been intercepted or “listened to”.
To summarize the approach of transmitting a message with polarized
photons, it involves five steps. The first three steps are for defining the key.
The fourth step involves checking for any interception by a spy; in such
cases, error statistics are performed, and if the error rate is less than 10%,
the “line” is considered secure. The fifth step is to transmit the message
with the key, contingent upon the fourth step indicating no risk of
interception.
Real-world transmission experiments are still underway to improve
communication range. While exact details are often confidential, it is likely
that transmission distances exceeding 100 km have been achieved today.
One of the main primary challenges is preventing alteration of the
electromagnetic wave, including photon polarization, which can result from
collisions with molecules and other interferences. The use of an optical
fibers presents a solution to avoid these issues. Additionally, recent research
has explored advancements using entangled photons. However, further
details on these developments are currently unavailable.
To return to the quantum formulation, a state of a system is represented by a
vector in a Hilbert space, which is a vector space. This vector can be written
as a linear combination of basis vectors. Taking the states |↕〉(1) and |↔〉(2)

of the “+” schema as basic states, their vector representation is shown in
Figure 8.44, where α and β are complex coefficients describing the
amplitude and phase of each state component.
Figure 8.44. Vector representation
Using Dirac’s notation |.〉 for a vector (denoted as “ket”), a vector in space
represents a qubit. Any vector (and therefore qubit) can be expressed as a
superposition of basic states.
The other states in the “× ” schema can be expressed in terms of the basis
vectors as shown in Figure 8.45.
Figure 8.45. Other schema states
The squared coefficients represent the probabilities of the occurrence of a
state. The factor  for the basic states indicates that 50% of the diagonally
polarized photons pass through the vertical or horizontal filters.
8.9. Appendix: The Crow and the Fox
A poetic English version by Edward Marsh of Jean de La Fontaine’s French
original.
A Crow sat perched upon an oak,
And in his beak he held a cheese.
A Fox snuffed up the savory breeze,
And thus in honeyed accent spoke:
“O Prince of Crows, such grace of mien
Has never in these parts been seen.
If but your song be half as good,
You are the Phoenix of the wood!”

The Crow, beside himself with pleasure,
And eager to display his voice,
Opened his beak, and dropped his treasure.
The Fox was on it in a trice.
“Learn, sir,” said he, “that flatterers live
On those who swallow what they say.
A cheese is not too much to give
For such a piece of sound advice.”
The Crow, ashamed to have been such easy prey
Swore, but too late, he shouldn’t catch him twice.
Notes
1 The sky is blue.
2 Computer in English.
3 THE in English.
4 LEAVE in English.
5 MASTER in English.
6 LIE in English.
7 FOX in English.
8 MISTER in English.
9 CROW in English.
10 LISTEN in English.
11 CHEESE in English.
12 LANGUAGE in English.

13 PLUMAGE in English.
14 PREY in English.
15 The Crow and the Fox in English.
16 Literally, Treatise on secret writing.
17 The sky is blue, the sea is green.
18 “ONCE UPON A TIME THERE WAS A LIVER MERCHANT WHO
SOLD LIVER IN THE TOWN OF FOIX. SHE TOLD ME, MY FAITH,
THIS IS THE FIRST TIME THAT I AM SELLING LIVER IN THE
TOWN OF FOIX”.
19 LONG LIVE COMPUTER SCIENCE in English.
OceanofPDF.com

9
Probabilities
CONCEPTS COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER.–
Fortune tellers make predictions, while weather services make forecasts.
Both try to anticipate the future with varying degrees of success, as
chance imposes its own law.
The evolution of populations, stock prices, climatology and other
phenomena are analyzed using models for their forecasts. These
mathematical models generally include many variables, making the use
of the computer essential for forecast calculations. These models
assume the occurrence of events with certain probabilities derived from
other probabilities. Therefore, the combined calculation of these
different probabilities proves to be quite useful.
The purpose of this chapter is to review the essential foundations of
probability, first in a practical way and then with more mathematical
formalism. The two sources of calculating probabilities, namely
enumeration and statistics, will be discussed.
All these concepts will then be applied to the evolution of processes
represented by graphs of transitions between states. In particular, the
properties of Markov chains will be exposed.
References: [BOI 68, COC 19, ENG 76, MAS 76, POC 71].
9.1. Chance
The Merriam Webster dictionary provides several meanings to the word
“chance” including:
1. The fortuitous or incalculable element in existence.

2. Something that happens unpredictably without discernible human
intention or observable cause.
The first definition is actually twofold:
a. It introduces the notion of causality according, suggesting that an
inexplicable event would nevertheless be due to an unknown cause.
Knowing the cause and the mechanisms that result from it could
(theoretically) explain the inexplicable. For instance, if a pot of
flowers falls from a window due to a gust of wind and hits a passerby
on the head, this event might be called fortuitous; however, it is
entirely explainable. An observer witnessing the scene can see that the
accident is inevitable. If the problem were not so complex, the laws of
mechanics could explain the accident. Therefore, “inexplicable” does
not mean coincidence.
b. It also suggests that the cause is a “power”. Could it be God? Consider
the famous anecdote of Napoleon asking Pierre-Simon de Laplace why
he does not mention the existence of God in his work Mécanique
céleste (Celestial Mechanics). Laplace, fiercely deterministic, replied,
“Sire, I didn’t need that assumption.”
The second definition brings up the fundamental question of the chapter:
can random events be predicted? The question lies at the origin of
probability theory. It emerged from games of chance. Chevalier de Méré’s
bet serves as a representative example from the time when probability
theory was developed by Blaise Pascal and Pierre de Fermat. Chevalier de
Méré noted that when rolling a die four times, there was a significant
chance of getting 6. He deduced that it must be even more likely to get a
double 6 by rolling 2 dice 24 times. Pascal showed that his reasoning was
incorrect. Indeed, in the first case, the probability of obtaining a 6 is 0.517,
while in the second case, the probability of obtaining a double 6 is only
0.491. The example highlights the field of calculating probabilities, which
defines the concept of forecasting: it does not provide a certain result, but
the chances of obtaining a given result.

9.2. Counting and probabilities
In the study of probability, it is common to refer to well-known examples
such as the throwing of a 6-sided die, the drawing of colored balls from a
jar, or the drawing of cards from a deck of cards. These examples are easy
to imagine and provide a better understanding of the basic concepts.
However, it is important to highlight that the concept of probability is not
limited to chance games. Probabilities are also used in many areas of daily
life, such as meteorology, economics and public health. Thus, in addition to
classic examples, more concrete and varied examples will be presented to
illustrate the scope of probabilities.
EXAMPLE 9.1.–
Consider the roll of a six-sided die and examine the chances of getting a
5 as the result. Assuming that the die is perfect (i.e. fair, with each face
having an equal probability of appearing), the chances of rolling a 5 are
the same as those of obtaining any other number between 1 and 6. Each
possible result is therefore equiprobable.
Since there are six possible outcomes and only one desired outcome,
there is a one-in-six chance of getting a 5. This can be expressed as a
ratio, where the probability of getting a given outcome is equal to the
number of desired results (here 1) divided by the number of possible
results (here 6). Thus, the probability of rolling a 5 is as follows:
Furthermore, if interested in outcome a, anything that is not a is called a
contrary outcome. Therefore, the probability of obtaining either the
outcome a or the contrary outcome is 1, which can be expressed by the
formula: p(outcome = a) + p(outcome ≠ a) = 1.
Finally, note that the sum of the probabilities of all possible outcomes is
equal to 1 (since there are 6 outcomes and each has a probability of
 It is certain that one of the possible outcomes will occur.

EXAMPLE 9.2.–
Consider a jar filled with identical balls of different colors. Suppose
there are 3 black balls and 2 white balls. If a ball is drawn at random,
what are the chances of drawing a black ball?
This problem is more complex than previous examples. However, the
probability of drawing a black ball is higher compared to drawing a
white ball, due to the greater number of black balls. Assuming each ball
is distinct, there are 5 possible results, 3 of which correspond to drawing
a black ball. Therefore, the probability of drawing a black ball is given
by the ratio , so p(drawing a black ball) = 
Similarly, the probability of drawing a white ball can be expressed as 
the p(drawing of a white ball) =  This probability is calculated as the
ratio of the number of favorable results (here, 3 for black balls and 2 for
white balls) to the number of possible results (here, 5 balls).
Note that, unlike the previous example, the probabilities are not equal:
drawing a black ball has a probability of , while drawing a white ball
has a probability of . Additionally, the sum of the probabilities for all
possible results is 
.

EXAMPLE 9.3.–
Consider a card game scenario where 2 cards are drawn from a deck of
52 cards (with 13 cards in each suit). To estimate the chances of
drawing 2 aces, start by calculating the total number of possible results.
First, estimate all possible results by designating the two cards as X and
Y. For the first card drawn (X), there are 52 possibilities, and for the
second card (Y), there are 51 remaining possibilities. Since the roles of
X and Y are interchangeable, the total number of results, without
counting any result twice, is 
 possible results.
There are 4 aces in the deck. For the first ace (X), there are 4
possibilities, and for the second ace (Y), there are 3 possibilities. Since
the roles X and Y are interchangeable, the number of expected results is
. This can be verified by listing all possible combinations:
Therefore, there are 6 favorable outcomes of 1,326 possible results of
drawing 2 aces. This can be expressed as the probability:
Now consider the case where no aces are obtained in the draw of the
two cards. For the first drawn, there are 48 possibilities, and for the
second card, there are 47 remaining possibilities. Since the order of
drawing does not matter, we use the combination formula, giving:
So, there are 1,128 possible results where neither card is an ace. The
total number of possible results remains 1,326, as previously calculated.
Thus, the probability of drawing no aces in 2 cards is:
There is a third possible result: drawing exactly one ace among the two
cards. If the first card drawn X is an ace, there are 4 possibilities for X,

and for the second card Y, there are 51 - 3 = 48 possibilities (since Y
cannot be an ace). Since X and Y are not interchangeable in this case,
the number of such outcomes is 4 x 48 = 192. Thus, the probability of
drawing exactly one ace in 2 cards is:
The three possible results do not have the same probability. They are not
equally probable. Note that 6 + 1,128 + 192 = 1,326, so that the sum of
the probabilities for all possible expected results is 1.
In summary, the probability calculation method illustrated in the three
previous examples involves:
1. Determining the number of possible results: identify the total number
of possible outcomes/results (also referred to as possible cases) and the
number of favorable outcomes (also referred to as favorable cases).
The probability is then calculated by dividing the number of favorable
outcomes by the number of possible outcomes. This approach follows
Pierre-Simon de Laplace’s definition of probability, which assumes
that all possible outcomes are equally likely and can be counted.
2. Probability constraints: the number of favorable outcomes can never
exceed the number of possible outcomes, which ensures that the
probability is always a positive number between 0 and 1, inclusive.
3. Sum of probabilities: the sum of the probabilities of all possible
outcomes is equal to 1. Consequently, the sum of the probability of a
specific outcome and the probability of its complement (i.e. the
contrary outcome) also equals 1.
For now, considerations are based on the previous examples. A more
precise, mathematical definition of probability and its properties will be
provided later. In this case, the focus is on counting methods, which are
necessary for determining probabilities. The concepts of permutation,
arrangement and combination discussed in Chapter 3 can be employed to
count favorable or possible events.
Recall the corresponding results:

The number of permutations of n objects: Pn = n!
The number of arrangements of k objects taken from n objects:
The number of combinations of k objects taken from n objects:
EXAMPLE 9.4.–
In a race with 20 horses, to determine the number of trifectas in order
(i.e. classifying three horses as first, second and third), use:
There is only one favorable case (the winning arrangement), so the
probability is:
For a trifecta in “disorder”, where the order of arrival does not matter,
the numbers of trifectas that can be formed from 20 horses is given by
the number of combinations of 3 elements taken from 20, i.e.:
There is only one favorable case (the winning combination), so the
probability is:

EXAMPLE 9.5.–
A jar contains 3 white balls and 2 black balls. The only difference
between the balls is their color. Drawing one ball allows for the
calculation of the probability of drawing a black ball or a white ball.
The number of possible outcomes is 5 (given by 
). There are 3
favorable outcomes for drawing a white ball (since there are 
white balls in the jar) and 2 favorable outcomes for drawing a black ball
(since there are 2 black balls in the jar). Thus, the probability of drawing
a white ball is:
and that the probability of drawing a black ball is:
Verification shows that p(white) + p(black) = 1. This confirms that the
sum of the probabilities for all possible outcomes equals 1, as only one
ball can be drawn from the jar.

EXAMPLE 9.6.–
Consider a deck of 52 cards (13 cards of each color/suit). Calculate the
following probabilities for drawing 2 cards: drawing 2 aces, drawing 2
cards that are not aces and drawing 1 ace and 1 card that is not an ace.
The number of possible outcomes is given by: 
For drawing 2 aces, the number of favorable outcomes is: 
Thus, the probability of drawing 2 aces is: 
For drawing 2 cards that are not aces, the number of favorable outcomes
is: 
 Thus, the probability of drawing 2 cards that are
not aces is: 
For drawing 1 ace and 1 card that is not an ace, the number of favorable
outcomes is: 
 Thus, the probability of drawing 1
ace and 1 card that is not an ace is: 
The approach, based on empirical examples, now requires a more formal
definition of the concept of probability.
9.3. Events and probabilities
Consider a non-empty set E with arbitrary elements. The parts (subsets) of
E are the sets that can be formed by selecting some elements of E and
leaving others. Both the empty part ∅ (containing no elements) and E itself
(containing all elements of E) are also parts (subsets) of E.

EXAMPLE 9.7.–
Let the set E be a, b, c, d, where a, b, c and d are the elements of E. All
parts of E are:
Part with 0 elements: ∅ = {}
Parts with 1 element: a, b, c, d
Parts with 2 elements: a, b, a, c, a, d, b, c, b, d, c, d
Parts with 3 elements: a, b, c, a, b, d, a, c, d, b, c, d
Part with 4 elements: E = a, b, c, d
Thus, there are 24 = 16 subsets in total, including all of the above
categories.
The set of all parts of a set E is denoted as (E). Note that the number of
elements in (E) is equal to 2n if E has n elements.
EXAMPLE 9.8.–
In example 9.7, the different parts of E can be considered as
combinations of k elements taken from the 4 elements of E. The number
of parts of each size is given by the binomial coefficients:
The number of parts with 0 elements is 
The number of 1-element parts is 
The number of 2-element parts is 
The number of 3-element parts is 
The number of 4-element parts 
The total number of parts is equal to 
This result can also be confirmed using the property of the binomial
coefficient that the total number of parts of a set with n elements are 2n.
For n = 4, 24 = 16.

Now consider the elements of (E) as events, and define a map p from (E)
to ℝ (the set of real numbers) that satisfies the following axioms:
AXIOMS.–
Axiom 1: ∀A ∈ (E) p(A) ≥ 0
Axiom 2: p(E) = 1
Axiom 3: if A ⋂ B = ∅, then p(A ⋃ B) = p(A) + p(B)
This map p is called a probability measure on (E).
A little vocabulary to clarify the terms used:
E is the certain event.
∅ is the impossible event.
a, b, c, d are elementary events (which cannot be decomposed into
simpler events).
If A ⋂ B = ∅, then A and B are said to be incompatible (or mutually
exclusive) events.
If Ā is the complement of A, then A and Ā are said to be
complementary (or contrary) events.

EXAMPLE 9.9.–
Let us return to example 9.7 and consider the set E = {a, b, c, d}. The
parts (or subsets) of E are: ∅, {a}, {b}, {c}, {d}, {a, b}, {a, c}, {a, d},
{b, c}, {b, d}, {c, d}, {a, b, c}, {a, b, d}, {a, c, d}, {b, c, d}, E.
Elementary events: {a}, {b}, {c}, {d}, ∅ are elementary events because
they cannot be decomposed into simpler elements.
Incompatible events: Two events are incompatible (or mutually
exclusive) if they have no elements in common. The pairs of
incompatible events are:
{a} and ∅, {a} and {b}, {a} and {c], {a} and {d},{b} and {c}, {b} and
{d},
{c} and {d}, {a} and {b, c}, {a} and {c, d}, {a} and {b, d}, {b} and
{c}, {b} and {d},
{b} and {a, c}, {b} and {a, d}, {b} and {a, c, d}, {b} and ∅, {c} and
{d}, {c} and {a, b},
{c} and {a, d}, {c} and {b, d}, {c} and {a, b, d}, {c} and ∅, {d} and
{a, b},
{d} and {a, c}, {d} and {b, c}, {d} and {a, b, c}, {d} and ∅, {a, b} and
{b, c},
{a, b} and ∅, {a, c} and {b, d}, {a, c} and ∅, {a, d} and {b, c},
{a, d} and ∅, {a, b, c} and ∅, {a, b, d} and ∅, {a, c, d} and ∅, {b, c,
d} and ∅, E and ∅
Contrary events: Two events are contrary if one is the complement of
the other. The pairs of contrary events are: {a} and {b, c, d}, {b} and
{a, c, d}, {c} and {a, b, d}, {d} and {a, b, c}, {a, b} and {c, d}, {a, c}
and {b, d}, {a, d} and {b, c}, E and ∅.
All these pairs of events A and B satisfy B = Ā (and vice versa).
Contrary and incompatible events: all pairs of events listed in the
previous list are both contrary and incompatible. It should be noted that
contrary events are always incompatible: if A and B are contrary, then B

= Ā and since A ⋂ B = ∅, A and B are incompatible. However, the
converse is not necessarily true. For example, {a} and b, c are
incompatible but are not contrary.
EXAMPLE 9.10.–
Let us denote drawing a card x from a deck of cards by {x}. The
elements of E are cards such as {ace of hearts}, {jack of diamonds}, {6
of clubs}, etc.
The event “drawing a heart” is defined as:
{hearts} = {ace of hearts} ⋃ {2 of hearts} ⋃ {3 of hearts} ⋃ ……. ⋃
{10 of hearts} ⋃ {jack of hearts} ⋃ {queen of hearts} ⋃ {king of
hearts} = {{ace of hearts}, {2 of hearts}, {3 of hearts}, ……., {10 of
hearts), {jack of hearts}, {queen of hearts}, {king of hearts}} and is a
part of E.
The events “drawing a heart” and “drawing a club” are two
incompatible events because: {heart} ⋂ {club} = ∅
The events “drawing a heart” and “drawing a club or a diamond or a
spade” are complementary events because: 
= {clubs} ⋃
{diamonds} ⋃ {spades}
Let us now list the properties of probability. From the definition axioms, the
following conclusions can be easily drawn, leaving the proofs to the reader:

EXAMPLE 9.8.–
Let us return to example 9.10, where {x} denotes drawing a card x from
a deck of cards. Since the events {“hearts”}, {“clubs”}, {“diamonds”}
and {“spades”} are pairwise disjoint, the following holds:
p(draw a heart) = p({“heart”}) = 1 – p({“club”} ⋃ {“diamonds”} ⋃
{“spade”}) = 1 – p({“club”}) – p({“diamonds”}) – p({“spades”})
Since drawing any card is certain: p(draw any card) = 1
To find the probability of drawing a heart or a 10, use the principle of
inclusion and exclusion: p(draw a heart or a 10) = p({“heart”}) +
p({“10”}) - p({“10”}{“heart”})
Since these events are disjoint:
p({“hearts”}) = p({ace of hearts} ⋃ {2 of hearts} ⋃ {3 of hearts} ⋃ …
⋃ {10 of hearts} ⋃ {jack of hearts} ⋃ {queen of hearts} ⋃ {king of
hearts}) = p({ace of hearts}) + p({2 of hearts}) + p({3 of hearts}) + …
+ p({10 of hearts}) + p({jack of hearts}) }) + p({queen of hearts}) +
p({king of hearts})
Similarly, the probability of drawing a 10 is:
p({“10”}) = p({10 of hearts} ⋃ {10 of clubs} ⋃ {10 of diamonds} ⋃
{10 of spades}) = p({10 of hearts}) + p({10 of clubs}) + p({10 of
diamonds}) + p({10 of spades})
Thus, p(draw a heart or a 10) = p({ace of hearts}) + p({2 of hearts}) +
p({3 of hearts}) +...... . + p({jack of hearts}) + p({queen of hearts}) +
p({king of hearts}) + p({10 of hearts}) + p({10 of clubs}) + p({10 of
diamonds}) + p({10 of spades}).

In general, the concept of equiprobability is useful for calculating
probabilities. Elementary events are considered equiprobable if they have
the same probability.
EXAMPLE 9.12.–
Consider the experiment of rolling a die. Assuming the die is fair, all
outcomes are equally probable. Therefore:
EXAMPLE 9.13.–
Consider drawing a card from a deck of cards. Assuming the deck is
standard and all cards are equally likely, each card has the same
probability of being drawn:
p({6 of clubs}) = p({3 of diamonds}) = p({jack of hearts}) = p({queen
of spades}) = …
In the case of n elementary equiprobable events Xi, and Xj, where p(Xi) =
p(Xj) for all i and j, the following holds:
Therefore:
It follows that for any event A ∈ (E), which can be expressed as A = X1 ⋃
X2 ⋃ … ⋃ Xk, where Xi are elementary events, the probability is:
This relationship is commonly expressed as follows: “The probability of an
event is the ratio of the number of favorable outcomes to the number of

possible outcomes.”
However, this definition is only valid for equiprobable events. This usual
definition has already been used previously. Now, let us consider some
examples to illustrate this concept.
EXAMPLE 9.14.–
In the case of rolling a die, the elementary events are equiprobable.
Therefore: 
Thus, the probability of rolling an odd number is:
Note that this usual definition of probability as a ratio of favorable
outcomes to possible outcomes is valid only for equiprobable events.
EXAMPLE 9.15.–
Drawing a card from a deck of cards, where all draws are equally likely
(assuming a fair deck), the probability of drawing a heart is calculated
as follows:
p({“hearts”}) = p({ace of hearts}) + p({King of hearts}) + p({Queen of
hearts}) + … + p({2 of hearts})
Since each card in the deck has a probability of 
A significant consequence of the equiprobability schema is that the sum of
the probabilities of all possible outcomes of an experiment equals 1. Let A,
B, …. be the incompatible (mutually exclusive) events resulting from the
experiment, and let n(A), n(B),… be their respective (cardinal) numbers of
outcomes (elements). If n = n(A) + n(B) + … represents the total number of
outcomes in the sample space E, then:

The basic principle of equiprobability for elementary events can be applied
in two ways:
1. By counting possible cases and favorable cases: this involves counting
the number of possible cases and the number of favorable cases.
Combinatorial analysis formulas can then be used to calculate the
probability of each event.
2. By using the law of large numbers: this law provides an approximate
value of the probability through statistical observations. It states that as
the number of observations increases, the relative frequency of an
event approaches its theoretical probability.
It is important to note that the law of large numbers only provides an
estimate of probability. For rare events, a large number of observations are
required to obtain a reliable estimate.
9.4. Statistics and probabilities
The previous approach to probability, based on counting possible and
favorable events, is not always feasible.

Figure 9.1. INSEE 2016 survey
For example, consider the INSEE1 survey conducted in 2016 on the use of
information and communication technologies and e-commerce in
businesses. An extract from this survey is shown in Figure 9.1. The survey
covered a sample of 12,500 active companies or individual businesses, each
employing at least 10 people (employees and non-employees), located in
mainland France or the overseas departments. INSEE specifies that this
sample is representative of approximately 191,000 companies.
The last column of the extract includes the statistical frequency, which is
the ratio of the number of companies meeting a specific criterion to the total
number of companies meeting at least one criterion. Since this is a survey,
the results are estimates intended to reflect the actual situation.
A valuable theorem can be used here in Bernoulli’s theorem, known as the
weak law of large numbers. This law can be expressed as follows:
Consider a population of n elements. Let f be the statistical frequency and p
the probability. For any positive number ε (as small as desired), the weak
law of large numbers states that the probability P(|f − p| < ε) approaches 1
as the number n of the population tends towards infinity, i.e. P(|f − p| < ε) =
1.

In other words, the probability that the statistical frequency closely
approximates the true probability increases as the number of elements
becomes very large. This implies that the statistical frequency can be
considered a good approximation of the probability when n is very large. In
the given example, although the number of company responses is not
infinite, it is sufficiently large. Therefore, an approximate value of the
probability can be obtained using the statistical frequency. Consequently,
the probability of a company having a website is approximately 0.2826.
This result is consistent with the primary definition of probability.
However, it does not guarantee an exact value, but only an approximate
one. While the number of company responses to the survey is “relatively”
large, larger samples are possible. Additionally, the sample is assumed to be
representative. This situation illustrates how another approach to the
concept of probability arises from statistical results.
EXAMPLE 9.16.–
According to an (imaginary) survey conducted on 2,000,000 French
people, 34% have a nose length greater than 6 cm. Thus, the
approximate probability that a French person has a nose length greater
than 6 cm can be estimated as p ≈ 0.34.
EXAMPLE 9.17.–
In a factory, out of 1,200 mechanical parts, 60 are found to be defective.
Thus, the probability of a part being defective can be estimated as:
Note that this method provides us a rough estimate of the probability rather
than an exact value, as the sample size is finite. This implies that the
estimated probability can be affected by bias and random variations.
Therefore, it is important to interpret the results with caution and consider
the margins of error associated with the estimate.

9.5. Compound probabilities
Given a set E and the set of events (E), let A, B ∈ (E) and suppose that
p(A) is non-zero. Define the conditional probability of B given A as:
This defines a new probability, denoted as p(B|A) or p(BifA) or p(BafterA)
or pA(B). This is known as conditional probability of B given A. It can be
verified that the axioms of probability (1, 2 and 3) are satisfied for this
conditional probability. The relationship can also be expressed as:
This expresses the idea that to have both A and B occur, A must first occur
with probability p(A), and then B must occur given that A has already
occurred, which can affect the calculation of p(B|A). Thus, the probabilities
multiply in this way.
Similarly, the expression can be written as: 
, so
that
From this, Bayes’ theorem is derived:

EXAMPLE 9.18.–
Take the example of the jar containing black and white balls. Suppose a
ball is drawn, without putting it back in the jar, then a second is drawn.
The probability of drawing two black balls is calculated as follows:
Apply the previous relationship:
Now, consider the same scenario, but this time the drawn ball is put
back into the jar after each draw. The probability of drawing two black
balls in this case is:

EXAMPLE 9.19.–
From studies on accidents, the following results are given:
The probability of having an accident if the driver is sober is
0.001:
The probability of having an accident if the driver is drunk is 0.02:
The probability of having a drunk driver is 0.01:
To find the overall probability of having an accident, p(accident),
consider the following scenarios (Figure 9.2 shows the cases in the form
of a tree):
Define D for drunk, S for sober, A for accident and N for no accident.
The given probabilities are:
Calculate the probabilities of each scenario involving an accident:

Drunk and accident:
Sober and accident:
Sum the probabilities of the scenarios involving an accident to find the
overall probability of having an accident:
Therefore, the probability of having an accident is approximately
0.00119.
Figure 9.2. Case tree
The other probabilities can be calculated using the same methods:
Now, calculate the probabilities of each scenario involving no accident:
Sober and no accident:

Drunk and no accident:
Sum the probabilities of the scenarios involving no accident to find the
overall probability of having no accident:
Verify that the sum of the probabilities of having an accident and not
having an accident is 1:
Finally, calculate the conditional probabilities:
Probability that a driver is sober given that an accident has
occurred:
Probability that a driver is sober given that no accident has
occurred:
The independence of two events A and B can be defined as follows: A and B
are independent if the probability of the event B does not depend on
whether or not event A occurs. In other words, A and B are independent if
the conditional probability of B given A is equal to the probability of B:
A and B are independent if and only if p(B|A) = p(B)
This can also be expressed by:
If this equality holds, then A and B are independent events (as in the case of
the second part of example 9.18).

EXAMPLE 9.20.–
Chevalier de Méré’s bet involves comparing two probabilities:
obtaining at least one double 6 by rolling two dice 24 times versus
obtaining at least one 6 by rolling a single die four times. To do this,
calculate the probabilities of these two events.
a. The probability of rolling at least one 6 in 4 rolls of a single die
First, examine the contrary event, which is the appearance of a
number that is not a 6. In a simple roll, there is a 5 in 6 chance of
not getting a 6. The corresponding probability is p(no 6) = 5/6.
The successive rolls of a die are independent. For 4 rolls, the
probability of not rolling a 6 in any of the rolls is:
 Consequently, the
probability of rolling at least one 6 in 4 rolls is:
b. Probability of rolling at least one double six in 24 rolls of two dice
The probability of not rolling a double 6 with two dice in a single
throw is 
. For 24 independent throws of two dice, the probability
of not getting a double 6 in any of the throws is:
Consequently, the probability of getting at least one double 6 in 24
throws is:
Thus, Chevalier de Méré assertion was incorrect.

9.6. Graphs, states, transitions
It is relevant (and more explicit) to use graphs to represent composite
probabilities, which will be of great use later. Suppose that the system being
studied starts in state 0 and can transition to discrete states numbered 1, 2,
3…, as shown in Figure 9.3.
Figure 9.3. Evolution of a system by transitions between states
Transitions from one state to another are events whose probability is
indicated by the arrow connecting the two states. The notation pij represents
the probability of moving from state i to state j, and these probabilities are
commonly called transition probabilities. In the case of the graph presented
previously, the only way to go from state 0 to state 3 is to first go through
state 1, then through state 2, before arriving at state 3. Therefore,
If the previous graph summarizes all the possibilities of transitions between
states, it is clear that p01 = 1, p12 = 1, p23 = 1. Thus, it is certain to go from
state 0 to state 3.
Figure 9.4. Evolution of a system
When the system is in state 0, it can either move to state 1 with probability
p01 or stay in state 0 with probability p00. It is important to take into account
these possibilities of remaining in the same state because it can happen for a
certain period of time. The graph in Figure 9.3, augmented with transitions
of the type “state x ⇒ state x”, is presented in Figure 9.4. There are
therefore only two possible eventualities, which implies that p00 + p01 = 1.
Similarly, p11 + p12 = 1 and p22 + p23 = 1. Finally, in state 3, the system can

only remain in this state, which means that the transition probability p33
must be equal to 1.
Consider the graph in Figure 9.5, representing a system that can evolve
between several states, where all possible transitions are represented.
Taking state 0 as an example, the possible evolutions are: 0 → 0, 0 → 1 and
0 → 2. Therefore, the probabilities must satisfy: p00 + p01 + p02 = 1.
Similarly, for other states, the probabilities are as follows:
These equations ensure that the sum of probabilities for all possible
transitions from a given state is equal to 1.
Figure 9.5. Various transitions between states
Now suppose the goal is to determine the probability that the system
transitions from state 0 to state 3. This can be a complex task due to the
infinite numbers of possible paths leading from state 0 to state 3. The direct
paths include:

Less direct paths can include “on the spot” transitions (such as 0-0, 1-1, 2-2,
3-3) or cycles (such as 0-1-2-0 or 0-1-3-2-0) repeated a certain number of
times. It is possible to determine the corresponding probability for each
defined path.
For example:
For the direct path 0-1-2-3, the probability is p01·p12·p23·
For the path 0-1-2-2-3, the probability is p01·p12·p22·p23·
These observations lead to the following two rules:
Multiplication rule: the probability of a sequence of independent
transitions (traversing the path) is the product of the probabilities of
each transition in the sequence (along the path), as shown in Figure
9.6.
Summation rule: the total probability of reaching a state j from a state i
can be found by summing the probabilities of all distinct paths that
lead from i to j (see Figure 9.7).

Figure 9.6. p12·p23·p34
Figure 9.7. p1 + p2 + p3
EXAMPLE 9.21.–
In a jar, there are 6 identical balls, each bearing a letter A, N, A, N, A, S.
A ball is drawn, then a second one (without replacing the first). The
question is: what is the probability that the second ball drawn has the
letter A?

Figure 9.8. Transition probabilities
To analyze this, consider the system initially in state 0 (no ball is
drawn). After drawing the first ball, the system can be in several states
represented by the letter drawn: A, N or S. The final state of interest is
drawing the letter A on the second draw. This evolution can be
represented by the graph in Figure 9.8, which indicates the transition
probabilities. By applying the previous rules, the probability can be
obtained as follows:
9.7. Markov chains
9.7.1. Definition
Consider a changing system (transition from one state to another state). This
system is supposed to pass from defined state to defined state, the number
of states being finite: E1, E2, E3, … , Em (a finite sequence of m discrete
states). The change of state is random, and the process of change of state is
called a stochastic sequence (a fancy word to simply say random).

Figure 9.9. Evolution of a system over time
The system evolves from state to state through states E1 to Em. It can
obviously pass through the same state multiple times, as shown in Figure
9.9, which represents the evolution of a system over time.
States are characterized by the values of random variables X(t), one random
variable for each discrete value of time. As time is discrete, the random
variables can be written with an index reminiscent of time: Xn for X(tn). For
a pair of states i and j at a time t = tn, pij (n) is the probability that the
system being in state i at time t = tn moves to state j at time t = tn+1. This
relationship can be explained using compound probabilities which make it
possible to calculate the probability of several independent events occurring
successively:
where pij (n) represents the probability of transition from state i to state j
during the duration from t = tn to t = tn+1. It is a conditional probability,
meaning the system must first be in state i at time tn, in state Xn−1 at time
tn−1, etc.
In the following, two simplifying hypotheses will be made:
Hypothesis H1: the system evolves “without memory”, meaning that the
transition from state i to state j does not depend on the previous states of the
system, but only on the present state of the system (specifically, the fact
that, at moment tn, the system is in state i). This hypothesis is called the
Markov property, and the stochastic process is called a Markov chain.
Mathematically, this translates into the equality:

where in−1, in−2, in−3, … , i0 represent any states.
Hypothesis H2: the transition probabilities are stationary, meaning they do
not depend on time. Therefore, the notation can be simplified to:
In other words, the probability of transition between two states does not
change over time. It remains the same between time tn and tn+1 as it does
between time tk and tk+1, where tk is any time. This assumption is called the
homogeneity property. Therefore, the focus will be solely on homogeneous
Markov chains.
EXAMPLE 9.22.–
Imagine a consumer who can only buy 3 similar products of different
brands A, B and C. The consumer’s reactions are of interest, particularly
in knowing which brand they purchased and predicting the brand they
will prefer during their next purchase.
Assuming these products are consumable and the consumer does not
remember the product he bought during his penultimate purchase, the
evolution between brands A, B and C (the states) corresponds to a
homogeneous Markov chain.

EXAMPLE 9.23.–
Consider a rabbit in an enclosure comprising 4 compartments linked
together by doors. Each compartment is associated with a possible state
of the rabbit’s presence. The rabbit moves from one compartment to
another by passing through a door, which corresponds to a stage in the
process of moving from one state to another. In Figure 9.10, the four
compartments are represented by states 1, 2, 3 and 4.
Figure 9.10. The world of the rabbit
The rabbit’s preferences for certain compartments (based on the
presence of food, for example) influence transitions between states.
However, the rabbit has no memory and only remembers the
compartment it is currently in (its last “stay”). Thus, the process of
passage between compartments forms a homogeneous Markov chain.
9.7.2. Transition matrix
To describe a homogeneous Markov chain, two types of probability are
used:
State probability vector: the probability qk(n) represents the chance of
finding the system in state Ek at the moment tn. With m states, there are
m probabilities qk(n) (for k = 1 to m). These probabilities are
conveniently arranged (and for the rest of the calculations) in a
probability vector:
The sum of these probabilities must equal 1:

Transition probability matrix: the transition probability pjk represents
the probability of transitioning from state Ej to state Ek in one time
step. These probabilities are stored in a matrix known as the transition
matrix T. In matrix T, the rows correspond to the departure states and
the columns correspond to the arrival states.
Each row of the matrix T sums to 1:
This ensures that the sum of the elements (probabilities) for transitioning
from any given state to all possible states is 1, which is a key feature of
transition matrices.
Such matrices are also referred to as stochastic matrices. Transition matrices
have the following remarkable property:
PROPERTY
The product of two transition matrices with the same number of rows
and columns is also a transition matrix.
In particular, if T is a transition matrix, then T2, T3, …., Tn are also
transition matrices.
This property holds for transition matrices because they satisfy the
following two conditions:
1. The sum of the elements in each row is equal to 1.

2. All elements of the matrix are non-negative (since they represent
probabilities).
EXAMPLE 9.24.–
Consider the following two transition matrices:
To verify the remarkable property of transition matrices, consider the
sum of the elements in a row of the product of the two matrices T.T′. It
can be observed that the sum of the elements in each row of the
resulting matrix is equal to 1 (as shown below).
The calculation can also be extended to T2 and T3 as follows:
Hence, it can be observed that the remarkable property of transition
matrices holds for to T2 and T3, as the sum of the elements in each row
of the resulting matrices equals 1.

EXAMPLE 9.25.–
Let us return to example 9.22. Suppose the known transition
probabilities are those in Figure 9.11, where the states A, B and C are
renamed as 1, 2 and 3.
The diagram provided is incomplete because the sum of the transition
probabilities from each state to all others must equal 1. Some transitions
are missing. For a complete representation, refer to Figure 9.12.
Figure 9.11. Incomplete graph
Figure 9.12. Completed graph

And the transition matrix is:
It is important to note that there is no probability of transition from state
1 to state 2, meaning that this probability is zero.
EXAMPLE 9.26.–
Let us return to example 9.23 and represent the states as a graph with
the transition probabilities (see Figure 9.13), assuming that the steps
consist of a change of compartment:
Figure 9.13. Transition graph
The transition matrix is then:
It should be noted that the transition probabilities from state 1 to state 3,
from state 2 to state 4, from state 3 to state 1 and from state 4 to state 2
are all zero (see Figure 9.13).

EXAMPLE 9.27.–
Consider a system that evolves through five states, numbered from 1 to
5.
The transition graph associated with this system is shown in Figure
9.14.
Figure 9.14. Transition graph
The transition matrix is as follows:
9.7.3. Evolution rules
Now, let us examine the relationship between the probability vector and the
transition matrix. To determine the probability of being in state Ek after n

steps, given that the system was in state Ej just after step n – 1, apply the
result to composite probabilities (using hypothesis H1):
If any state at time n – 1 is considered, or if all possibilities of previous
states at time n – 1 are taken into account, the probability of being in state
Ek after n steps is obtained by summing all the corresponding probabilities
(see Figure 9.15).
Figure 9.15. Evolution towards Ek
This relationship can also be expressed in a matrix form:
By induction, it can be deduced that:

EXAMPLE 9.28.–
Let us return to example 9.27 and assume that the system is initially in
state E1 with certainty at time 0. In this case, the initial probability
vector is as follows:
To determine the probability vectors at subsequent stages, the
relationship previously discussed can be applied:
and
This process allows for the computation of the probability distribution
across states at any given step n.
9.7.4. Ergodicity
What happens when n tends to infinity in the relation Q(n) = Q(0).Tn, i.e.
long after the start of the process? If Tn converges to a limit T0, then the
transition matrix T is said to be ergodic. In this case, Q(n) approaches a
limit vector Q0. Here are three theorems that help determine the limit
behavior of the matrix T, though they are not proved here.

THEOREM 9.1.–
If T is a regular transition matrix, the following properties hold:
T admits a fixed point Q0, which is a probability vector with
strictly positive components.
T0 = lim Tn for n tending towards infinity. The matrix T0 has rows
that are identical and equal to Q0.
Q being any probability vector, when n tends to infinity, lim Q.Tn =
Q0.
To understand the theorem, it is necessary to clarify the notions of a regular
matrix and a fixed point.
a. A transition matrix T is considered regular if, from a certain power n;
all elements of Tn are strictly positive.

EXAMPLE 9.29.–
Consider the following transition matrices:
Square them:
The squared matrix is sufficient to show that T1 is regular. However, for
 and 
, zeros remain. Therefore, continue by cubing the matrices:
which is sufficient to prove that T2 is regular. It remains T3, but the
result of 
 will always be of the form:
T3 is therefore not regular.
The definition of a regular matrix can be applied to matrices that are not
transition matrices. However, if a matrix is a transition matrix and it is
regular, it is referred to as an ergodic matrix.
a. A fixed point of a square matrix T is a vector Q0 such that Q0T = Q0.

EXAMPLE 9.30.–
Let the transition matrix T be defined by:
To find the fixed point Q0 = [x y z] where x + y + z = 1 because Q0 is a
probability vector, the following must hold if Q0 is indeed a fixed point:
If Q0 is a fixed point, then the following must hold:
Thus, x = y = 0 and z = 1. The vector Q0 = [0 0 1] is the fixed point of
the matrix T.
NOTE.–
It is essential to note that theorem 9.1 states that if the matrix T is
regular, then it has a fixed point Q0. However, the converse is not true: a
matrix T having a fixed point Q0 is not necessarily regular. This is
evident from the previous example, where, despite the existence of a
fixed point, the transition matrix T was not regular for sufficiently large
n:
To illustrate the application of theorem 9.1, consider the following example.

EXAMPLE 9.31.–
Consider a motorist who changes cars every year according to the
following rules:
Figure 9.16. Transition graph
When he owns a Pampa, he buys a Savanna.
When he owns a Savanna, he buys a Tundra.
When he owns a Tundra, he buys a Tundra 50% of the time, a
Pampa 25% of the time and a Savanna 25% of the time.
The car brands are treated as states, and the process is shown in Figure
9.16 (where Pampa = 1, Savanna = 2 and Tundra = 3).
To determine if the transition matrix T is regular, examine the powers of
the matrix T:
T is therefore very regular. According to theorem 9.1, T has a fixed
point Q0 = [x y z] with x + y + z = 1
The equation Q0T = Q0 translates to:

In 2023, the motorist had a Savanna. What car will he have in 2043
(assuming the brands still exist)?
2023 corresponds to the date n = 0; the probability vector is Q(0) = [0 1
0].
To find the probability vector for n = 20 (the year 2043), calculate
Q(20). This can be obtained by multiplying the initial vector Q(0) by the
transition matrix T raised to the 20th power:
Here, n = 20 is considered sufficient large, so the approximation with n
= ∞ is used.
He will therefore be four times more likely to own a Tundra than a
Pampa and two times more likely to own a Tundra than a Savanna.

THEOREM 9.2.–
If the number of states is discrete and finite, and if the transition graph
is strongly connected, the conclusions of theorem 9.1 are valid.
A graph is strongly connected if, for every pair of vertices (i, j), there exists
a path from i to j and a path from j to i.
Theorem 9.2 extends theorem 9.1 to strongly connected transition graphs.
Specifically, a transition graph is strongly connected if every state is
reachable from any other state. In other words, no subset of states is isolated
from the rest of the graph.
Ergodicity is closely related to the connectivity of the transition graph.
Specifically, the connectivity of the transition graph is a necessary condition
for the system to be ergodic. This implies that for each state i, it must be
possible to reach any other state j from i, either directly or by passing
through one or more intermediate states.
EXAMPLE 9.32.–
Check on the previous example (motorist changing cars: example 9.31)
to see if theorem 9.2 applies.
The number of states is discrete and finite (3 states). Refer to the
transition graph in Figure 9.16:
Vertices 1 and 2: 1 → 2 and 2 → 3 → 1
Vertices 1 and 3: 1 → 2 → 3 and 3 → 1
Vertices 2 and 3: 2 → 3 and 3 → 2
The graph is therefore strongly connected, and thus theorem 9.2 applies:
the process is ergodic.
Lastly, a final result on ergodicity will be considered.

THEOREM 9.3.–
If the transition matrix T has a simple eigenvalue equal to 1, and all
other eigenvalues have absolute values less than 1 (or moduli less than 1
if they are complex), then the conclusions of theorem 9.1 are valid.
In other words, if the matrix T meets the conditions specified in this
theorem, the process can be considered ergodic. This theorem is especially
useful for verifying the ergodicity of a stochastic process when the
conditions of theorem 9.2 are not met.

EXAMPLE 9.33.
Consider the case where the driver makes the following purchasing
choices based on his current car:
If he owns a Pampa, he buys a Pampa 50% of the time and a
Tundra 50% of the time.
If he owns a Savanna, he buys a Pampa 75% of the time and a
Savanna 25% of the time.
If he owns a Tundra, he buys a Savanna.
Represent these choices in the form of a transition matrix T:
To find the eigenvalues λ of T, solve the equation det(T − λI) = 0, where
I is the identity matrix.
Thus:
which leads to the equation 8λ3 − 6λ2 + λ − 3 = 0.
In this case, λ = 1 is immediately identified as a root of the equation.
Factoring the equation yields:
The quadratic term 8λ2 + 2λ + 3 has roots 
 both of which
have a modulus less than 1. According to theorem 9.3, the process is

therefore ergodic. Additionally, the fixed point of the transition matrix T
is 
Notes
1 Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques (French
National Institute for Statistics and Economic Studies).
OceanofPDF.com

10
Descriptive Statistics
CONCEPTS COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER.–
Using computer resources in the field of statistics is essential, as
statistics involves handling large quantities of data to extract relevant
information.
This chapter aims to review fundamental statistical concepts, including
numerical tables, graphic representations, measures of central tendency
and measures of dispersion.
Subsequently, elementary modeling techniques, such as linear
adjustment/regression, are presented in detail, along with the concept of
correlation.
This modeling is then applied to statistical series that describe the
evolution of phenomena over time, specifically chronological series.
References: [BOI 68, GRA 78, MAS 76].
10.1. Statistical description
10.1.1. A little vocabulary
The key terms of the statistical vocabulary are defined by the standard NF
X05-001. Essential elements of statistical terminology include the
following:
Population: this refers to the entire set of elements or subjects that the
statistical study concerns. It typically includes a large number of elements.
In practice, statistical studies are often conducted on a sample drawn from
this population.

Sample: this is a subset of the population selected for conducting a
statistical study. The sample is chosen to accurately represent the
population, allowing for meaningful analysis and inference.
EXAMPLE 10.1.–
The objective is to measure the average diameter of sand grains on a
beach. Given the large number of grains, measuring the diameter of
each one is impractical. Instead, a sample of 1,000 grains of sand are
selected for diameter measurements, allowing for an estimation of the
average diameter.
Individual or statistical unit: refers to any element within a population or
sample. This can include a person, object, event or any entity that is subject
to a statistical study.
EXAMPLE 10.2.–
In the context of the previous example (example 10.1), each grain of
sand serves as a statistical unit rather than an individual.
Character or statistical variable: a property or aspect under study within a
population. It is essential to differentiate between:
Quantitative characters: these are expressed in numerical terms.
Examples include a person’s age, the number of employees in a
company or an employee’s wage. Quantitative characteristics are
further divided into two categories:
1. Measurable characters: their values represent measurements in a
chosen unit. For instance, a person’s height in centimeters or an
employee’s wage in euros are measurable characters. Mathematical
operations such as addition can be applied to these values.
2. Identifiable characters: their values correspond to a measurement
scale but do not permit arithmetic operations. For example,
temperature in degree Celsius (°C) is an identifiable character. The

sum of two temperatures is not meaningful (e.g. combining 20°C water
with 100°C water does not result in 120°C water).
Qualitative characteristics: these are not inherently numerical. To use
these characteristics, values (either numerical or non-numerical) are
assigned through coding. Examples include marital status (e.g. single =
1, married = 2, widowed = 3, divorced = 4) and occupation codes (e.g.
INSEE codes).
Size: the number of elements corresponds to a specific value of a character.
For example, in a dataset of 100 families, if only 4 families have exactly 6
children, then the size for the value 6 of the “number of children” character
is 4.
Statistical series: a collection of pairs (x, n), where x represents a specific
value of the character and n denotes the corresponding number of
occurrences of that value.
EXAMPLE 10.3.–
Out of 100 families, the distribution of children is as follows:
12 families with 0 children
26 families with 1 child
20 families with 2 children
15 families with 3 children
14 families with 4 children
9 families with 5 children
4 families with 6 children
The corresponding statistical series for this distribution is: (12, 0), (26,
1), (20, 2), (15, 3), (14, 4), (9, 5), (4, 6).

10.1.2. Tabular presentation and frequency
As previously mentioned, a statistical series associates each value xi with its
corresponding frequency ni. This series can be represented in a table with
two columns (or two rows), xi and ni, making it easier to read. The total
number n of observations is the sum of all ni values, and it is used to
determine the statistical frequency for each value xi:
where:
Frequency is often expressed as a percentage rather than as a decimal
fraction (number between 0 and 1).

EXAMPLE 10.4.–
Given the classification of 94,641 voters in an electoral constituency of
their chosen candidate (with abstentions, blank or invalid votes
excluded), the candidates are numbered 1 through 6, representing a
qualitative and discreet variable. The corresponding statistical series is
as follows:
(1, 33,521) (2, 21,775) (3, 19,496) (4, 15,752) (5, 2,812) (6, 1,285)
This statistical series can be effectively represented in Figure 10.1.
Figure 10.1. Statistical series table
The character corresponds to the number of votes obtained by each
candidate. Since the character is discrete, it is convenient to denote its
values by xi, where i varies from 1 to 6.
The same notation is used for the values of the candidates, noted ni. The
index i numbers the entries in the previous table (for this example, xi =
i). For instance,
for x3 = 3, n3 = 19,496.
The total number of votes is the sum of all ni: n = n1 + n2 + n3 + n4 + n5
+ n6 = 94,641.
The statistical frequency fi is obtained by dividing each ni by n and can
be added to the table (see Figure 10.2).

Figure 10.2. Effective table and frequency
With the frequencies, it can be observed that candidate 3 received
slightly more than 20% of the votes.
The previous example dealt with a statistical series with a discrete
character. When the character is continuous, it is necessary to replace the
value of the character with a range of values, known as a class. In this case,
the value of the character falls within an interval defined by two values,
typically represented as a ≤ xi < b, which is denoted as x ∈ [a, b[. The
difference (b – a) is referred to as the amplitude class.
EXAMPLE 10.5.–
In the competitive entrance examination for higher education, where the
scores obtained by the 280 eligible candidates range from 0 to 20.
Their distribution can be represented using a table, as shown in Figure
10.3.
Figure 10.3. Effective table and frequency
When classes have equal amplitude, each class (a, b) can be represented by
its midpoint (center), without ambiguity
This approach simplifies the conversion of a continuous statistical series
into a discrete one. Additionally, it allows for the aggregation of classes by
merging some of them, thereby simplifying the analysis of the data.

EXAMPLE 10.6.–
For instance, in example 10.5, it is possible to consolidate classes of
amplitude 2 into larger classes with amplitude 4 (see Figure 10.4) or
even amplitude 6 (see Figure 10.5). While this approach simplifies the
data presentation, it is important to note that increasing the class
amplitude results in a loss of precision.
Thus, there is a trade-off between simplification and the level of detail
retained.
Figure 10.4. Amplitude class 4
Figure 10.5. Amplitude class 6

EXAMPLE 10.7.–
From the general agricultural census of 1955, the distribution of farms
in France based on their total surface area is shown in Figure 10.6. This
data excludes woodlands and provides a snapshot of farm sizes across
the country.
Figure 10.6. Statistical series with different amplitude classes
For clarity in presentation, classes with varying amplitudes are often
used. Directly representing a class by its center is generally avoided
unless accompanied by additional information.
In some cases, it is necessary to determine the cumulative sizes (or
cumulative frequencies) up to a specific value of the characteristic being
considered. These are calculated as follows:

EXAMPLE 10.8.–
For example 10.7, Figure 10.7 shows both cumulative size and
cumulative frequency for the distribution of farms based on their total
surface area.
Figure 10.7. Number, frequency and increasing cumulative frequency
The table presented in Figure 10.7 answers the question: “How many
farms are less than 50 hectares, both in terms of number and
percentage?”
For the interval [20, 50[, the table shows: a number of 2,165,183 farms,
representing a frequency of 0.9580 or 95.8%. It is important to note that
in the final class, the cumulative size figures represent the total size, and
the cumulative frequency is equal to 1. While cumulative numbers and
frequencies are typically expected to increase, there are cases where
they may decrease, as shown in Figure 10.8.

Figure 10.8. Number, frequency, decreasing cumulative frequency
This data indicates that 1,880,858 farms, or 83.22% of the total, have an
area of 2 hectares or more.
10.1.3. Two-dimensional series
So far, one-dimensional series have been explored, focusing on a single
character. However, it is also possible to analyze statistical series with
multiple characters, resulting in multidimensional series. A series involving
two-character series is known as a two-dimensional series and can be
represented in a “crosstab” or matrix. In this setup, each pair of character
values (xi, yj) corresponds to a frequency ni j.
The sums of the elements in rows and columns create marginal
distributions, which are one-dimensional series. These marginal
distributions enable the breakdown of a two-dimensional statistical series
into two separate one-dimensional statistical series.

EXAMPLE 10.9.–
Consider the statistical series representing a population of 142 boys
from a nursery school, analyzed based on their weight (y) in kg and age
(x) in years.
Figure 10.9. Two-dimensional series
The representative table of this series is presented in Figure 10.9.
10.2. Graphical representations
A table provides a structured way to represent a statistical series. However,
it often lacks the clarity needed to grasp the overall trends and patterns. To
address this, graphical representations are frequently used. These visual
tools can effectively convey complex data in an accessible format. The
primary types of graphical representations include Cartesian diagrams,
which give rise to bar charts and histograms, polar charts, pie charts,
figurative charts and scatter plots. This discussion will focus on the most
important types of graphical representations.
10.2.1. Bar charts
In a system of orthogonal axes, each pair (xi, ni) of a statistical series is
represented by a point on the graph, where xi represents a value of a
character and ni represents the corresponding size.
The abscissa xi and the ordinate ni are used to place this point.

Frequency fi can also be used instead of size ni, resulting in a Cartesian
diagram. For a continuous character distributed into classes of equal width,
the representation can be simplified by using the center of each class as the
character’s value.
Additionally, connecting the vertices of the bars with a broken line forms
the polygon of sizes (or the polygon of frequencies if the frequencies are
used instead of numbers).
EXAMPLE 10.10.–
The results of the voters’ votes for the six candidates are shown in
Figure 10.10.
Figure 10.10. Bar chart.

EXAMPLE 10.11.–
Oral grades obtained in a competitive examination for higher education
are shown in Figure 10.11.
Figure 10.11. Polygon of sizes.
When the character is continuous, there are an infinite number of points,
and the polygon of sizes (or frequencies) becomes a continuous curve
known as the curve of sizes (or frequencies), as shown in Figure 10.12

Figure 10.12. Case of a continuous character.
10.2.2. Histograms
Histograms are commonly used to represent continuous characters. Instead
of displaying individual values of the character on the x-axis, histograms
use classes to group these values together. Consequently, histograms
employ rectangles, rather than bars, to visualize data.

EXAMPLE 10.12.–
Return to example 10.11. Figure 10.13 shows the histogram
representation in addition to the bar representation.
Figure 10.13. Histogram representation.
In a histogram, the height of each rectangle is proportional to the
corresponding size, while the widths of the classes remain equal. Thus, the
total area of the histogram reflects the total size.
The polygon of sizes is obtained by connecting the midpoints of the upper
edges of the rectangles in a histogram. By convention, this polygon starts
and ends at zero, as shown in Figure 10.13. It is evident that the total area of
the histogram equals the area enclosed by the polygon of the sizes. Both
areas are proportional to the total size.
When the amplitudes are not uniform (equal), it is important to ensure the
area of each rectangle in the histogram is proportional to the corresponding
size.

EXAMPLE 10.13.–
Returning to example 10.11, which involves a distribution with classes
of unequal amplitudes (see Figure 10.14), Figure 10.15 shows the
application of the area rule. For example, the total area A = A1 + A2 +
A3. The value represented by the last class on the histogram must be
divided by 3.
Figure 10.14. Unequal classes
Figure 10.15. Histograms
10.2.3. Cumulative diagrams
In a Cartesian coordinate system, cumulative sizes and frequencies can be
represented in three distinct cases:
when the character is discrete;
when the character is continuous and divided into classes;
when the character is continuous and the classes have zero amplitude.
To illustrate the three cases of representing cumulative sizes and
frequencies, let us consider an example.
1. When the character is discrete:


EXAMPLE 10.14.–
The statistical series shown in Figure 10.16 represents the number of
children per woman for a sample of 30 women.
Figure 10.16. Cumulative size
Plotting the cumulative number against the character values results in a
staircase-shaped curve, as shown in Figure 10.17.
This shape arises because, when the character reaches a specific discrete
value, the cumulative size increases abruptly to a new level, remaining
constant until the next discrete value is reached. This discontinuity in
the character values gives the curve its “stepped” appearance.
Figure 10.17. Cumulative chart.

2. When the character is continuous and divided into classes:
In general, the cumulative number at the start of a class differs from that at
the end. Unless specified otherwise, it is assumed that within a class, the
cumulative size varies linearly with the character value. This assumption
allows for the construction of a cumulative polygon made up of line
segments.
EXAMPLE 10.15.–
Based on the data from example 10.11, the corresponding cumulative
polygon is shown in Figure 10.18.
Figure 10.18. Cumulative polygon.
3. The character is continuous and the classes have zero amplitude:

Figure 10.19. Case of a continuous character.
When the amplitude of the classes tends towards zero in the case of a
continuous character, the cumulative polygon converges to a cumulative
curve.
The general shape of this curve is shown in Figure 10.19.
10.2.4. Polar diagrams
The representation principle is outlined in Figure 10.20:
The angle θ is proportional to the character.
The vector radius ρ is proportional to the corresponding size.
Figure 10.20. Principle of a polar diagram
In general, polar diagrams are used for representing periodic characters.

EXAMPLE 10.16.–
Monthly automobile declaration statistics are shown in Figure 10.21
using a polar plot, which facilitates a month-by-month comparison for
each year.
Figure 10.21. Polar diagram.
10.2.5. Pie charts
Pie charts are used to highlight the relative importance of sizes. The
diagram resembles a pie, where each sector’s central angle is proportional
to the value of the corresponding size.

EXAMPLE 10.17.–
Figure 10.22. Pie chart.
The geographic distribution of activities for a multinational corporation
is shown in Figure 10.22 as a pie chart.
10.2.6. Figurative diagrams
A figurative diagram uses illustrative drawings to represent quantities,
providing a qualitative understanding of the relative importance of different
phenomena. However, these diagrams lack precision on a quantitative level.

EXAMPLE 10.18.–
Figure 10.23 is a figurative diagram illustrating the distribution of wool
sheep herds by country of breeding in 1960.
Figure 10.23. Figurative diagram
10.2.7. Point clouds
In the case of a two-dimensional series, each pair (xi, yj) of character values
can be represented by a point, forming a global point cloud.

When dealing with a continuous character, where not all pairs of values are
available but rather a distribution into classes, the approach differs. For
each pair of classes (forming a rectangle), a number of points equal to the
corresponding size is plotted, distributed homogeneously within the
rectangle.
EXAMPLE 10.19.–
For the statistical series in example 10.9, the resulting point cloud is
shown in Figure 10.24.
To create this visualization, each pair of classes is represented by a
number of points corresponding to the size, with these points distributed
homogeneously within the rectangle formed by the classes.
Figure 10.24. A point cloud
10.3. Position parameters

When comparing two statistical series, two key types of parameters are
employed:
Position parameters: these include measures such as the mode, median
and various averages.
Dispersion parameters: these cover metrics such as range, mean
deviation, variance, standard deviation, coefficient of variation and
dispersion index.
This section will focus on positional parameters, with dispersion parameters
discussed in the subsequent section.
10.3.1. Mode
The mode, or dominant value, x0, is the value of the character which
corresponds to the largest size.
EXAMPLE 10.20.–
Referring to the statistical series from example 10.4, which is a discrete
statistical series, the highest count is 33,521, corresponding to the
character value 1. Thus, the mode of the series is x0 = 1.
EXAMPLE 10.21.–
Referring to the statistical series from example 10.5, which is a
continuous statistical series, the highest number is 100, corresponding
to the class [14, 16[. This class is called a modal class. By convention,
the mode is defined as the center of this class. Therefore, the mode of
the series is x0 = 15.

NOTE.–
The size of a statistical series can present multiple relative maxima,
resulting in several modes (see Figure 10.25). Therefore, the mode is
most useful and informative in the case of unimodal series.
Figure 10.25. Multiple modes.
NOTE.–
In the case of a continuous character, two different distributions into
classes can lead to two different mode values.
EXAMPLE 10.22.–
In example 10.21, the distribution into classes of unequal amplitudes, as
shown in Figure 10.14, results in a mode of x0 = 17 rather than x0 = 15.
This occurs because the mode is defined as the class with the highest
frequency, and in this case, the class [16, 18[ has the maximum number
of observations.
10.3.2. Median
The median is defined as the value of the character that divides the
statistical series into two equal parts. It corresponds to the median value xm

where the cumulative frequency reaches , as shown in Figure 10.26.
Figure 10.26. Determining the median.
Now indicate how the median is determined in practice. First, look at the
method of determination by calculation. There are two cases to take into
account:
i. The character is discrete
To calculate the median of a discrete character, follow these steps:
1. Arrange the data: list the character values of the statistical series in
ascending (or descending) order.
2. Calculate cumulative frequencies: compute the cumulative frequency
by progressively adding the frequencies of each character value.
3. Identify the median: find the value associated with the cumulative
frequency that reaches or exceeds half of the total size.
3a) If the total size is odd: the median is the character value for
which the cumulative frequency first reaches or exceeds half of
the total size.
3b) If the total size is even: the median is the average of the two-
character values adjacent to the cumulative frequency that reaches
or exceeds half of the total size.
4. Determine the median: the value identified in step 3 is the median of
the discrete character.

Figure 10.27. First case
Figure 10.28. Second case
Applying these steps to the discrete case:
In the first case (see Figure 10.27), the median is xm = 4.
In the second case (see Figure 10.28), there is no distinct median,
which is generally true for discrete characters. However, by
convention, the median can be referred to as xm = 3 in this case.
ii. The character is continuous
To calculate the median of a continuous character:
1. Group the data: organize the data into classes, either with equal or
unequal amplitudes, ensuring that each class covers a range of
character values.
2. Calculate cumulative frequencies: compute the cumulative frequency
by summing the frequencies of all preceding classes.
3. Identify the median class: determine the class, where the cumulative
frequency first reaches or exceeds half of the total population.
4. Apply the median formula for continuous classes: use the following
formula to calculate the median:

5. Determine the median: the value obtained from the formula is the
median of the continuous character.

EXAMPLE 10.23.–
Refer to example 10.8 using the table provided in Figure 10.29:
Figure 10.29. Statistical table
The median size is half the total size, which is 1130077.5. By
examining the cumulative frequencies, the interval closest to 1130077.5
is the interval [5, 10[. Therefore, the median class (or median interval)
is the class [5, 10[.
To find the specific median within this class, use the formula: xm = 5 +
Δx, where 0 < Δx < 5.
To determine the value of Δx, perform linear interpolation.
Between x = 5 and x = 10, the cumulative frequency is 470,763.
Between x = 5 and x = 5 + Δx, the cumulative frequency is 1130077.5 –
790,562 = 339515.5.
Therefore, the median xm is approximately computed as follows:
To determine the median graphically, we can use one of the following
methods:
Increase cumulative polygon: plot the increasing cumulative frequency
polygon. The median corresponds to the point where the cumulative
frequency reaches half 
 of the total frequency.

Decrease cumulative polygon: plot the decreasing cumulative
frequency polygon. The median corresponds to the point where the
cumulative frequency reaches half 
 of the total frequency.
Intersection of both polygons: plot both the increasing and decreasing
cumulative frequency polygons on the same graph. The abscissa (x-
coordinate) at the intersection of these two polygons provides the
value of the median.

EXAMPLE 10.24.–
In this example, 150 workers are classified according to their age, as
shown in Figure 10.30.
Figure 10.30. Statistical table
Draw the cumulative polygons as shown in Figure 10.31. The
intersection of the two polygons provides the median value xm = 35.3.
Figure 10.31. Cumulative polygons.
The notion of median can be generalized by introducing quartiles. Quartiles
divide the entire population into four equal parts, each representing 25% of
the dataset.
First quartile (Q1): represents the value that separates the lowest 25%
of the data from the rest. It corresponds to the median of the lower half

of the data.
Second quartile (Q2): also known as the median, Q2 divides the data
into two equal parts, with 50% of the data below and 50% above.
Third quartile (Q3): separates the highest 25% of the data from the
rest. It is equivalent to the median of the upper half of the data.
In Figure 10.32, these quartiles are graphically representation. The values of
Q1, Q2 (median) and Q3 are marked on the x-axis. The range between Q1
and Q3 is known as the interquartile range, which contains 50% of the data.
Figure 10.32. Quartiles
The total dataset can also be divided into 10 equal parts, known as deciles,
or into 100 equal parts, known as centiles:
Deciles: divide the data into 10 equal parts, with each part representing
10% of the total data. The corresponding values are called deciles.
Centiles: divide the data into 100 equal parts, with each part
representing 1% of the total data. The corresponding values are called
centiles.
10.3.3. Averages
There are several types of averages, but the focus here is on the main
definitions, starting with the weighted arithmetic average, commonly
known as the mean.
The weighted arithmetic average m (or mean) of a discrete statistical series
is defined by the formula:

where ni represents the frequency of the value xi of the character and 
represents the total size of the dataset. The mean m in often denoted as < x >
or  But here it is simply referred to as m.
When frequencies are expressed as proportions (i.e. fi, where Σi fi = 1), the
previous formula for the mean becomes:
EXAMPLE 10.25.–
Refer to example 10.14 and calculate the frequency fi using the data
provided in Figure 10.33.
Figure 10.33. Frequency table
According to the values in Figure 10.33, the mean is calculated as
follows:
Since the number of children must be an integer, the mean is rounded to
3.
Another method of calculating the mean, which can simplify the process,
involves using a provisional average, denoted as μ. The provisional average
is typically chosen to be close to the mean; for example, the median μ = xm
can be used.

Each value xi can be expressed as the sum of m and the difference between
xi and μ, either: xi = μ + (xi − μ).
This representation allows each value xi to be written in terms of the
provisional average μ. Consequently, the mean m can be calculated as
follows:
EXAMPLE 10.26.–
Apply the provisional average method to example 10.25 by setting μ = 2
(see Figure 10.34)
Figure 10.34. Table of operations
Further simplification, the mean is given as follows:
Apart from the weighted arithmetic mean, other types of averages are
sometimes used. One such average is the mean square, which is defined as
the square root of the mean of the squares of the character values.
Mean square: the formula for the mean square q is:
Geometric mean:

Harmonic mean: h such that
It can be demonstrated that, among these averages, the following relation
holds:
10.3.4. Comparison of position parameters
In general, a frequency curve that is assumed to be unimodal often presents
asymmetry, leading to different values for the mode, median and arithmetic
mean. These values are distributed in distinct ways, as shown in Figure
10.35.
Figure 10.35. Comparison of position parameters.
When the frequency curve is only slightly asymmetric, the three position
parameters approximately satisfy the following relationship, known as the
empirical Pearson–Morice formula:

where x0 represents the mode, xm is the median and m is the arithmetic
mean.
Figure 10.36. Symmetric statistical distribution.
When the frequency curve is symmetrical (and unimodal), the three position
parameters are combined, as shown in Figure 10.36.
10.4. Dispersion parameters
Dispersion parameters measure the spread of a statistical distribution. The
main types include the range, the interquartile range, the mean deviation
and the standard deviation.
10.4.1. Range, interquartile range, mean range
The extent of a statistical series is defined as the difference between the
extreme values of the character. The difference between the first quartile
(Q1) and third quartile (Q3) is known as the interquartile range. These
definitions are shown in Figure 10.37.

Figure 10.37. Extent and interquartile range.
Figure 10.38. Interdecile range.
The interdecile range and the intercentile range are defined analogously.
The interdecile range is the difference between the 9th and 1st deciles,
while the intercentile range is the difference between specified centiles.
These concepts are shown in Figure 10.38.
The arithmetic mean of the absolute deviations from the arithmetic mean is
called the mean deviation. It is calculated using the following formula:
where ni represents the frequency of the value xi and m is the arithmetic
mean.

EXAMPLE 10.27.–
Consider the statistical series represented in the table in Figure 10.39,
which presents the distances of 1,000 localities in Île-de-France from
Paris.
The calculated statistics are as follows:
Arithmetic mean: 
Range: 50,
First quartile: 
Third quartile: 
Interquartile range: 
Mean deviation: 
Figure 10.39. Table for calculating dispersion parameters
10.4.2. Variance and standard deviation
The variance is the average of the squared deviations from the mean,
calculated as follows:

The standard deviation or quadratic mean deviation is the square root of
the variance:
The variance (and hence the standard deviation) can also be expressed in an
alternative, equivalent form using a provisional mean μ. Consider:
Then:
Summing over all i:
Since,
The term 
 simplifies to zero:
Thus:

This result is known as Koenig’s theorem.
If μ is chosen to be 0, the result simplifies to:
where q2 is the mean square, leading to the Huygens–Koenig result.
EXAMPLE 10.28.–
Apply the previous results to example 10.27 using the data provided in
the table in Figure 10.40.
Figure 10.40. Table in Figure 10.39 completed
Applying the definition, the variance is calculated as follows:
Using a provisional mean μ = 5: v = 40788.50 − (4.24 − 5)2 = 40.21
With a provisional mean of 0: v = 58118.50 − (4.24)2 = 40.21
The standard deviation is:

10.4.3. Coefficient of variation and concentration index
When the scale of a character is expanded or contracted, the dispersion of a
statistical series is affected. Specifically, if xi, ρ, and m are transformed to
x′i, ρ′ and m′ with:
Although the standard deviation and the mean are altered by this
transformation, the ratio of these two quantities remains unchanged. This
ratio is known as the coefficient of variation:
The coefficient of variation is invariant under homothetic changes of scale,
allowing for comparisons between two statistical series with different
scales.
Given a statistical series (xi, ni), plotting the cumulative percentage of nixi
against the cumulative percentage of ni yields a curve known as the
concentration curve or Lorenz curve. This curve is typically represented
within a square with sides of length 100.

EXAMPLE 10.29.–
Modify the table in Figure 10.40 to include the percentages as shown in
Figure 10.41.
Figure 10.41. Percentage table
Draw the curve of the cumulative nixi percentages as a function of the
cumulative ni percentages (see Figure 10.42.).
Figure 10.42. Lorenz curve
The equipartition line divides the square into two regions of equal areas.

When the Lorenz curve deviates from this line, it indicates a higher
concentration of data. To measure this concentration, the concentration
index or Gini index is used. This index is defined by the area A between the
equipartition line and the Lorenz curve, relative to the area of the half-
square, which is 5,000. The Gini index is calculated as follows:
The Gini index ranges from 0 to 1. A value of 0 indicates perfect equality (0
concentration), meaning that the data is evenly distributed. Conversely, a
value of 1 indicates maximum concentration, where the entire area A (A =
5,000) is between the equipartition line and the Lorenz curve.
10.5. Linear adjustment
10.5.1. Principle of adjustment
A statistical series consists of a set of numerical data. To explore
relationships between these data, it is often useful to model them in a more
concise and understandable way. One common approach is fitting, which
involves finding a function ni = f(xi) that best represents the data. In
practice, the points (xi, ni) form a scatter of point, and the goal is to find a
curve that best fits this scatter.
In the remainder of the discussion, since the focus is on curves and their
graphical representation, sizes will be denoted as yi instead of ni, to obtain
the desired curve yi = f(xi).
The main methods for adjusting point scatter are:
1. Graphical adjustment improved by the mean point method: this
method involves drawing a curve that approximately passes through
the mean points of the grouping intervals, offering a simplified
graphical representation of the point scatter.
2. Mechanical adjustment by the methods of scaled averages or moving
averages: these methods calculate successive averages over subsets of

neighboring points, helping to obtain an adjustment curve by
smoothing out the fluctuations in the scatter points.
3. Analytical adjustment: this method uses the least squares technique to
determine the mathematical equation that best represents the
relationship between the variables in point scatter. It minimizes the
sum of the squares of the differences between the observed values and
those predicted by the adjustment curve.
For a graphical adjustment, the principle is relatively simple: it involves
drawing a freehand curve that appears to best fit among the scatter points
(see Figure 10.43). This method has a significant drawback: the adjustment
obtained is imprecise and dependent on the designer’s judgment. However,
it also offers two important advantages: first, it helps in identifying and
potentially eliminating “outlier” points that may be excluded in other
adjustment methods; second, it is characterized by its simplicity and low
cost, as it requires only basic drawing skills.
Figure 10.43. Graphic adjustment.
To obtain a more precise fitting curve, the average point method can be
used. This method involves connecting successive points so as to form
triangles and then drawing a median for each triangle (note that the median,
in the geometric sense, is the line segment connecting a vertex of a triangle
to the midpoint of the opposite side). Next, the midpoints of these medians
are connected (see Figure 10.44). This approach results in a smoother curve
that better captures the overall trends in the point scatter.

Figure 10.44. Mean point method.
The principle of mechanical adjustment involves replacing the series of
pairs (xi, yi) with a new series of pairs 
, where  are calculated from
yi using a specific method. Two main processes are commonly used:
The scaled average method
The pairs are divided into groups, as shown in Figure 10.45.
Figure 10.45. Scaled average method
The resulting points, which are fewer in number, are then connected with
line segments. Another variation involves applying a weighting to the
central element. For example, for the point 
 in Figure 10.45, the
calculation can be expressed as:

However, this method has some drawbacks. First, it reduces the number of
points available for adjustment. Additionally, it relies on an arbitrary
splitting of points and the arbitrary calculation of 
. Another disadvantage
is that the point cloud must have a certain structure to be effectively
modeled by a curve.
The moving average method
This method uses an integer p, for example, 3, allowing calculation by
recurrence:
Figure 10.46 shows the transformation applied.
Figure 10.46. Moving average method
This method results in a loss of only 2 points, and the operation resembles a
form of smoothing.
Graphical and mechanical adjustments provide an approximation of the
adjustment curve’s shape. Next, a curve of known type, represented by the
equation y = f(x), is chosen. This equation includes several parameters for
which optimal values need to be determined.
For example, for a line with the equation y = ax + b, the parameters to be
determined are a and b. For a parabola with the equation y = ax2 + bx + c,
the parameters to be determined are a, b and c. Determining these
parameters is the goal of analytical fitting, with the least square’s method
being the most commonly used technique.

Consider Figure 10.47, which shows a few points and the curve y = f(x)
supposed to best represent these points.
For each point (xi, yi), the corresponding point on the assumed adjustment
curve (xi, y′i), where y′i = f(xi), is evaluated. The difference in absolute value
between the ordinates of these two points is then measured:
Figure 10.47. Least squares method.
The following quantity is then formed:
To determine the unknown parameters a, b, c, etc. of the function f(x), M is
minimized. This involves solving the system of equations obtained by
setting the partial derivatives of M to zero:
This process results in a system of equations that can be complex and
requires solving to find the optimal parameters.

10.5.2. Linear adjustment
If the shape of the point cloud permits, a linear fit can be attempted using
the linear equation y = ax + b. This straightforward fitting method is
referred to as linear adjustment.
For a statistical series consisting of n points (xi, yi), where the focus is on
these points as a collection rather than a series, the arithmetic means of the
abscissa and ordinate are calculated as follows:
As previously described, the objective function is:
The partial derivatives: to find the optimal values for a and b, set the partial
derivatives of M with respect to a and b to zero:
The system of two linear equations with the unknowns a and b and can be
derived from minimizing the sum of squared deviations. Using the averages
mx and my, the system of equations is:
Here is a step-by-step approach to solving the system:

1. Sum of squares and cross products:
This equation comes from setting the partial derivative of M with respect to
a to zero.
This equation comes from setting the partial derivative of M with respect to
b to zero.
2. Simplify the system:
Using the averages mx and my, where:
The system of equations can be written as:
3. Matrix form: this can be represented in matrix form
4. Solving for parameters: Calculate the determinants to find a and b,

In parallel,
and
The parameters a and b are then computed as follows:
Thus:
It is implicitly assumed that the denominator 
 is non-zero. This
will be further explained.
By working in centered coordinates, simpler expression for a and b can be
obtained. Define:
These new coordinates satisfy the relationships 
 and 
.
Specifically,

and
In the new coordinates, the formulas of a and b become:
since 
Likewise
and
hence the following simplified expressions for a and b:
These relationships are simpler, highlighting the advantage of working with
cantered coordinates. Additionally, the denominator 
 is strictly positive
(assuming not all Xi are zero simultaneously), which justifies solving the
system of equations (Δ ≠ 0).
To find the minimum value of M, start with the following expression:

Thus:
Summing this over all i yields:
Then, the minimum value of M is:
Because Mmin ≥ 0, it follows that:
This inequality is known as the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality.

EXAMPLE 10.30.–
Consider the statistical series represented in Figure 10.48, which shows
the average hourly wages (in euros) of professional workers in the metal
industries of the Paris region from 1950 to 1964 (note that these values
are fictitious).
The appearance of the scatterplot suggests that a linear fit may be
appropriate.
The calculations required to determine the fitting line are detailed in
Figure 10.49, with the result of this fitting shown in Figure 10.50.
The slope a and intercept b of the fitting line are computed as follows:
Thus, the equation of the fitting line is:
y = 0.22x − 422.49
This linear model allows for interpolation:
Average hourly wage in 1955: 2.25 euros.
Average hourly wage in 1966: 4.64 euros.

Figure 10.48. Statistical distribution.
Figure 10.49. Details of calculations

Figure 10.50. Linear adjustment.
10.6. Chronological series
10.6.1. Introduction
A chronological series, or temporal series, is a statistical series that
represents changes in particular magnitude over time. Chronological series
are commonly used to analyze economic, social or scientific phenomena.
In this section, a chronological series is used to illustrate variations in the
number of job applications in France from 1973 to 1978, expressed in
thousands. These data sourced from an article published in Le Monde on
April 24, 1979 (see Figure 10.51).

Figure 10.51. Change in the number of job applications
The variation of a socio-economic phenomenon over time generally results
from four fundamental components:
The long-term movement or general trend: this represents the overall
direction and evolution of the phenomenon over an extended period. It
can be ascending (upward), descending (downward) or stable.
Seasonal movement: this includes regular and recurring variations
observed at specific times of the year. These variations are typically
linked to seasonal factors such as holidays, agricultural cycles and
festivals.
Accidental variations: these are due to unforeseen and non-periodic
events such as strikes, droughts, floods and wars. These variations are
often regarded as temporary disturbances in the time series.
Cyclical movement: this results from the periodicity of economic
phases such as and recession. The importance and impact of cyclical
movements can be subject to debate among economists.
The study of a chronological series involves separating and identifying its
different components. In this section, the focus will be on analyzing the
trend and seasonal movement (at the monthly level in the chosen example).

Two models can be used to decompose a time series:
1. The additive model: in this model, the different components are treated
as distinct elements that add together. The notations used are as
follows: yi represents the raw data, 
 represents the data
corresponding to the general trend, si denotes the seasonal component
and ei accounts for accidental variations and cyclical movement.
According to this model, the relationship is expressed as:
In other words, the observed value yi is the sum of the general trend 
,
the seasonal component si and the accidental variations ei.
2. The multiplicative model: in this model, the components are treated as
multiplicative factors that interact with each other. In this case, it is
assumed that the seasonal component is proportional to the general
trend. The relationship is given by:
where ci = (1 + αi) is called the seasonal coefficient.
Depending on the nature of the data, we might choose between the additive
and multiplicative models. However, the multiplicative model is generally
preferred for its ability to account for proportional variations.

Figure 10.52. Change year by year.
In the study, it is possible to identify distinct periods within which seasonal
variations can be observed. In this example, periods correspond to years
and seasons to months. Figures 10.52 and 10.53 show the repeatability of
seasons (months) within each period (year), helping to visualize seasonal
variations and their regularity over time.
For the analysis, the term ei, will be disregarded, simplifying the seasonal
coefficient to:

Figure 10.53. Change month by month.
Assuming that the seasonal component is independent of the period and
only depends on the season, it is necessary to calculate 12 seasonal
coefficients, each corresponding to a specific month.
Additionally, it is assumed that seasonal increases are offset by seasonal
decreases, meaning that seasonal fluctuations balance out.
For an additive model, this results in the condition that the sum of the
seasonal coefficients for all seasons of a given period is equal to zero: Σj sj
= 0, where the index “j” represents the seasons of a given period.
For a multiplicative model, the sum of the seasonal coefficients must equal
the total number of seasons, i.e. Σj cj = (number of seasons) (in this
example, Σj cj = 12). This hypothesis may not always be valid for every
time series.
10.6.2. Study of the general trend
The general trend in a time can be obtained using one of the following
methods:

the scaled average method or the moving average method;
analytical adjustment.
Each method has its advantages, and the choice depends on the nature of
the data and the specific requirements of the analysis.
In the example, the scaled average method is first used to determine the
general trend by calculating the averages for each year (see Figure 10.54).
This method involves averaging over successive periods to smooth out
seasonal fluctuations and highlight the general trend. The graphical
representation in Figure 10.54 suggests a linear fit is appropriate for the
overall trend, indicating an increasing trend that can be approximated by a
straight line.
To simplify the data, month by month and year by year, values are assigned:
−71 for January 1973, −69 for February 1973, −67 for March 1973, etc., up
to +71 for December 1978. This adjustment results in an average mx of 0,
meaning that Xi = xi − mx = xi.

Figure 10.54. Representation of change.


Figure 10.55. Detailed calculations
Detailed calculations of the linear fit are provided in Figure 10.55(a)–(c).
Figure 10.56. Adjustment line for the general trend.
From the tables in Figure 10.55, the following values are deduced: mx = 0,
my = 817.22, the next sum of squares 
 and the next sum of
products ΣiXiYi = 849,630. Thus, the equation of the adjustment line, as
shown in Figure 10.56, is: y = 6.83x + 817.22.

10.6.3. Study of seasonal variations
To analyze seasonal variations of a phenomenon, several methods can be
employed. In this study, two methods will be highlighted.
a. Monthly average method
Calculate the average for each month across all years. This yields the
monthly averages. Compute the annual average, which is the average of
these monthly averages. The “seasonal coefficient” is then determined by
the formula:
In this approach, the overall period is defined as the year, and the season is
represented by the month (see Figure 13.57).
By following these steps, the hypothesis that the sum of seasonal
coefficients should equal 12 can be verified, i.e. 
.
Figure 10.57. Determination of seasonal coefficients
The monthly seasonal coefficients obtained can be applied in two different
ways:
1. Seasonal adjustment:
Objective: to remove the seasonal component from the raw data.
Method: divide the raw data by the corresponding monthly
seasonal coefficients. This process yields seasonally adjusted
data, which highlights the underlying trend and helps to analyze
the general trend of the phenomenon without seasonal effects.
Formula:

2. Seasonal reconstruction:
Objective: to model or reconstruct the original data based on the
identified general trend and seasonal effects.
Method: multiply the trend values by the seasonal coefficient for
each period. This method combines the general trend with the
seasonal component to approximate the original data. Although
simple, this method provides a basic representation of seasonal
variations.
Formula :
b. Method of reporting to the general trend
In this method, the general trend is assumed to have been determined, for
instance, through linear adjustment. The focus here is on understanding how
the raw data deviates from this general trend over time. The steps involved
are as follows:
1. Computing the ratio: for each month and year, compute the ratio
between the raw data and the general trend data. This ratio reflects the
seasonal component of the data relative to the trend. The formula used
is as follows:
2. Results: organize these ratios in a table or graph to visualize the
seasonal deviations. This table or graph will provide insights into how
much the raw data deviates from the general trend in each season.
For each month and year, calculate the ratio between the raw data and the
general trend data, as shown in the table in Figure 10.58.

Figure 10.58. Monthly seasonal coefficients
Figure 10.59. Ratio process.
The last row of the table shows the monthly seasonal coefficients, assumed
to be independent of the years. By multiplying these seasonal coefficients
with the general trend data, the model displayed in Figure 10.59 is produced
and compared to the raw data.
Ratio chain process:
Calculate the ratios 
. For example:

etc.
Figure 10.60. Highlighting seasonal variations
Record these ratios in a table, highlighting ratios greater than 1 and ratios
less than 1, after sorting them column by column, as shown in Figure 10.60.
This approach allows for clearer identification of seasonal phenomena.
Modify these results by relating them to January as follows:

End the ratio chain by calculating 
. To eliminate the
influence of the long-term trend, multiply each average by a factor k to
achieve a final value of 1. This yields the adjusted series, as shown in
Figure 10.61. Compute k12 as follows:
Thus:
This adjustment results in the modified ratios presented in Figure 10.61.

Figure 10.61. Modified ratios
Figure 10.62. Ratio chain process.
The average of the modified ratios is 0.92. Normalizing this average to 1
yields the seasonal coefficients listed in the final row of the table, as shown
in Figure 10.60. Figure 10.62 presents a comparison between the models
obtained with the raw data, showing that the result is closest to that derived
from the ratios to the general trend.

10.7. Covariance and correlation
10.7.1. Regression lines
To perform a linear fit on two-dimensional statistical series, consider the set
of triples (xi, yj, nij), where xi is a value of the first character, yj is a value of
the second character and nij represents the frequency or count associated
with the pair (xi,yj). Such a series is typically displayed in a crosstab format
(see example 10.9) and can be visualized using a scatter plot, as shown in
Figure 10.24.
To fit a line to this scatter plot, we can seek a linear relationship of the form
y = f(x), or x = g(y).
In this section, the focus is on linear adjustments using straight lines. For a
linear fit, the goal is to find a line of the form y = ax + b, where a and b are
the parameters to be determined.
For the curve y = f(x) = ax + b, which represents the straight line Dx/y:
Parameters in original coordinates:
Parameters in centered coordinates:
(Xi = xi−mx and Yi = yi−my),
Then:
For the curve x = g(y) = a′y + b′, which represents the straight line Dx/y,
a simple exchange between x and y in the previous relationships
provides the following.
Parameters in original coordinates:

Parameters in centered coordinates:
The equation of this line x = g(y) = a′y + b′ can be rewritten as:
Figure 10.63. Linear regression lines.
These two lines Dy/x and Dx/y are called (linear) regression lines. They are,
in general, distinct, but both pass through the “middle point” (mx, my) (see
Figure 10.63).

EXAMPLE 10.31.–
To determine the regression lines for the statistical series from example
10.9, detailed calculations are provided in Figure 10.64. For each class,
represented by its center, the frequency c of each pair (xi, yi) must be
considered. For instance, the pair (3.5, 7.5) appears 19 times, so c = 19.
This requires adjusting the average and sums to ensure accurate results.
From Figure 10.63, the calculated values for a, b, a' and b′are:
Thus, the equations of the regression lines are:
These regression lines are shown in Figure 10.65.

Figure 10.64. Details of calculations

Figure 10.65. Regression lines.
10.7.2. Linear correlation
The difference between the regression lines indicates the strength of the
correlation, in this case, linear. If the lines nearly overlap, it suggests a high
correlation. Conversely, if the lines are nearly perpendicular, it implies a
weak or even zero correlation. To obtain a more precise measure of
correlation, calculate the product a × a′:
This quantity is always non-negative, leading to Schwarz’s inequality:

The correlation is maximum when the regression lines are perfectly aligned,
which implies:
In this case, Schwarz’s equality holds:
Correlation is zero when the lines are perpendicular, which implies
Since a × a′ ≥ 0, the only possible value for a × a′ in this case is zero.
However, instead of using a × a′ directly, the square root of this product is
used as the measure of correlation, known as the linear correlation
coefficient, denoted by r:
The range of variation of the correlation coefficient r is between -1 and +1.
Extreme values of r correspond to a strong correlation, while a value of 0
indicates no correlation (see Figure 10.66).
Figure 10.66. Overview of r values
The linear correlation coefficient r can also be expressed using the
covariance of x and y as well as their standard deviations σ(x) and σ(y).

Recall that the variances υ(x) and υ(y) are calculated as follows:
The covariance of x and y is defined as:
The linear correlation coefficient r can then be written in the following
form:

EXAMPLE 10.32.–
Returning to the calculations from example 10.31, the linear correlation
coefficient can be derived using the formula:
where a = 0.17 and a′ = 0.002. Substituting these values yields:
This result indicates a correlation that is practically zero. Figure 10.64
shows that the regression lines are nearly perpendicular, reinforcing the
observation of a very weak correlation.
For further context, the covariance between x and y, and standard
deviations σ(x) and σ(y) are calculated as follows:
These calculations confirm that the linear correlation coefficient
 reflects a negligible correlation between x and y.
The linear correlation coefficient has two key properties: invariance by
translation and invariance by change of scale.
Translation invariance: when xi is transformed into 
 and yi
into 
, the means mx and my are shifted to 

and 
, respectively. Consequently, Xi transforms into
 and 
. This results in no change to
the expression of r.
Invariance by change of scale: when xi is transformed into 
and yi into 
, the means transforms to 
and 
. Thus, Xi becomes 
and 
Consequently:
Important warning: although correlation can suggest a mutual influence
between two traits or even imply a cause-and-effect relationship, it is
essential to consider the limitations of correlation analysis:
a. Determining causality: it is generally challenging to ascertain with
certainty which of the two variables, x or y, is the cause and which is
the effect, unless it is clearly evident from the context or experimental
design.
b. Spurious correlations: it is crucial to be aware of “accidental” or even
far-fetched correlations. A strong correlation does not necessarily
imply a real causal relationship. For an entertaining look at some
surprising correlations, the reader may visit the website:
https://tylervigen.com/spurious-correlations.
c. Third-variable influence: it is also important to recognize that x and y
might be related to a third variable. For instance, while a strong
correlation might exist between sunglasses sales and ice cream sales,
the underlying factor could be temperature. Higher temperatures may
lead to increased sales of both sunglasses and ice cream, without a
direct causal link between the two variables.
OceanofPDF.com

11
Probability Laws and Simulation
CONCEPTS COVERED IN THIS CHAPTER.–
This chapter serves as a bridge between the previous chapters on
probability (Chapter 9) and statistics (Chapter 10).
After covering the fundamental concepts of random variables – both
discrete and continuous – various types of event occurrence modeling,
known as probability distributions (laws), are explored.
These descriptions are described in terms of probability expressions,
mathematical expectation and standard deviation, with a focus on
common distributions such as the uniform, binomial, Poisson,
exponential and normal distributions.
The field of computer science has facilitated the development of
simulation techniques that recreate real phenomena on a computer.
These simulations rely on random sampling according to specific
probability distributions, which are modeled using generating programs.
This chapter concludes with the application of simulation to a classic
problem in queuing theory, providing a detailed examination of the
M/M/1 queue model.
References: [PHE 77, COC 19].
11.1. Random variables
Suppose that an experiment can produce several results under identical
conditions, assuming for the moment that their number is finite and denoted
by A, B, …, K. The appearance of these results is random, and it is
convenient to associate the value of a random variable X with each result.
For example:

X = 1 for event A,
X = 2 for event B,
X = 3 for event C,
etc.
The probabilities of occurrence of events are then denoted as follows:
p(event A) = p(X = 1),
p(event B) = p(X = 2),
etc.
The probability p(X) can be considered a function of the variable X. This
function, p(X), is known as a probability law and characterizes the
distribution of possible results of the random experiment.

EXAMPLE 11.1.–
A jar contains 2 white balls and 4 black balls. Apart from their color, the
balls are identical. Two balls are drawn at random. The possible events
are as follows:
A. 2 white balls.
B. 1 white ball and 1 black ball.
C. 2 black balls.
The random variable X is defined such that:
X: 1 for event A;
X: 2 for event B;
X: 3 for event C.
To determine the probabilities of these events in terms of X, note that
the jar contains a total of 6 balls.
For event A (2 white balls), there is only one way to draw 2 white balls,
which is by drawing the two white balls available in the jar.
To find the probability of event A (i.e. X = 1):
Like 
 and 
, then 
.
For event B (i.e. X = 2: 1 white ball and 1 black ball), the number of
ways to choose a white ball and a black ball from the available balls
needs to be determined.

There are 2 white balls and 4 black balls. The number of ways to choose
1 white ball from 2 and 1 black ball from 4 is calculated as follows:
Number of ways to choose a white ball and a black ball = (number of
ways to choose 1 white ball from 2) × (number of ways to choose 1
black ball from 4)
Number of ways to choose 1 white ball from 2 and 1 black ball from
Therefore, the probability of event B (i.e. X = 2) is:
As 
 and 
, then 
.
For event C (i.e. X = 3: 2 black balls), there is only one way to draw 2
black balls, which involves drawing both black balls from the jar.
To find the probability of event C:
As 
 and 
, then 
.
Confirming that the sum of probabilities for all events equals 1: p(X =
1) + p(X = 2) + p(X = 3) = 1.
The probability law p(X) is shown in Figure 11.1. This is a discrete
probability law because the random variable X takes on discrete values.

Figure 11.1. Graphical representation of the probability law.
In the previous example, the values taken by the random variable X serve
primarily to “count” the events, such as indicating whether 2 white balls, 1
white ball and 1 black ball or 2 black balls are drawn. In this case, X simply
labels the outcomes of the random experiment. However, a random variable
can also take on values with specific, meaningful interpretations. For
instance, consider example 11.2, where the values of the random variable
are not just labels but represent quantities with inherent significance.

EXAMPLE 11.2.–
A dice game works as follows: the die is thrown four times. The
player’s gain or loss is determined by the number of times a “1”
appears.
The player wins 2 euros each time a “1” appears and loses 2 euros
otherwise. For 4 rolls of the die, there are 5 possible situations, each
representing the player’s gain or loss. These outcomes are used to
define the value of a random variable X, which reflects the player’s net
gain or loss.
Case 1: “1” never comes out. The player loses 2 euros four times,
leading a total loss of 8 euros. Thus, the value of the random
variable is therefore X = −8.
Case 2: “1” appears exactly once. The player wins 2 euros once but
loses 6 euros, resulting in a net loss of 4 euros. Therefore, X = −4.
Case 3:“1” appears exactly twice. The player wins 2 euros and
loses 2 euros, resulting in no net gain or loss. Thus, X = 0.
Case 4: “1” appears exactly three times. The player wins 6 euros
and loses 2 euros, resulting in a net gain of 4 euros. Hence, X = 4.
Case 5: “1” appears four times. The player wins 8 euros, resulting
in a net gain of 8 euros. Thus, X = 8.
The random variable X thus takes 5 discrete values: −8; −4, 0, +4 and +
8. When rolling a six-sided die, the probability of rolling a “1” is
effectively , while the probability of rolling a number other than “1” is
. To simplify the notations, let p represent the probability of rolling a
“1” (i.e. 
) and q represent the probability of rolling any other
number (i.e. 
).
Calculate the probabilities corresponding to the different situations as
follows:
Probability that no “1” appears (therefore multiplying the probability q
four times by itself) comes out during the four throws of the die:

Probability of rolling a “1” exactly once during the four rolls of the die:
p(X = −2) = (Number of ways to roll a “1” exactly once in 4 throws) ×
(Product of the probabilities that “1” comes out 1 time and that it does
not come out three times).
Probability of rolling a “1” exactly twice during the four rolls of the die:
p(X = 0) = (Number of ways to roll a “1” exactly two times out of 4
throws) × (Probability of rolling a “1” twice) × (Probability of not
rolling a “1” twice).
Probability for a 1 to roll exactly three times during the four rolls of the
die:
p(X = 4) = (number of times to see 1 come out three times out of 4
throws) × (probability that 1 comes out three times) × (probability that 1
does not come out).
Probability of rolling a “1” exactly four times during the four rolls of the
die:

p(X = 8) = (Number of ways to roll a “1” exactly four times out of 4
throws) × (Probability of rolling a “1” in each throw).
The corresponding probability law is graphically represented in Figure
14.2.
Figure 11.2. Graphical representation of the probability law.
Note that, in general, the probability is given by the following
expression:
where 
 is the binomial coefficient, representing the number of ways to
choose k objects from n total objects. This formula is applicable within
the framework of the binomial probability distribution, also known as
Bernoulli’s law. This formula will be used for calculations later on.
A random variable can take real values, which can be either discrete or
continuous. In the previous examples, the values were discrete, indicating
that the probability law is discrete.

For continuous random variables, the probability is determined using the
concept of probability density. Consider the example of selecting a random
point on a line segment AB. To locate the points of the segment, the line
containing the segment is oriented as an axis, with an origin defining the
abscissa x. The position of any point on the segment is given by its abscissa
x.
The abscissa of the endpoints A and B of the segment are a and b
(where a < b).
A point M of the segment has an abscissa x such that a ≤ x ≤ b.
Choosing a point at random is the equivalent to selecting x randomly
between a and b.
Consider X the random variable with abscissa x as its values (see Figure
11.3). To characterize the distribution of possible values of X, the concept of
probability density is introduced.
Figure 11.3. Problem situation
A segment contains an infinite number of points, so the variable X has an
infinite range of values. Choosing an abscissa point x represents a choice
among an infinite set, which results in a probability of zero. Therefore, the
approach must be modified to not consider the probability of finding a point
“exactly at x”, but rather the probability of finding a point within the
interval dx as it will be greater for larger dx and smaller for smaller dx.
Hence, there should be a proportional relationship between dx and the
probability, denoted as dp (by analogy with dx), i.e.
This notation expresses the relationship between the interval dx and the
probability dp. The “proportionality coefficient” f(x) can generally depend
on the value x. The term f(x) represents the probability density

In the case of a continuous random variable where each point is equally
likely, f(x) does not depend on x and is therefore constant.
The probability density function must satisfy the following conditions:
It must be non-negative: f(x) ≥ 0.
It must be continuous over the interval [a, b].
The integral of the probability density function over the interval [a, b]
must be equal to:
This condition has a graphical interpretation: the area under the curve y =
f(x), between the x-axis and the vertical lines x = a and x = b, must be equal
to 1 (see Figure 11.4).
Figure 11.4. Probability density.
If a and b are finite, then f(x) = 0 for x < a and x > b. In the example where
f(x) = k is a constant, the integral 
 simplifies to k(b− a). This
leads to:
This result is shown in Figure 11.5.

Figure 11.5. Probability density.
Returning to the general case where the probability density is a function of
x. In the continuous case, the expression p(X = x) is replaced by p(α ≤ X ≤
β), which is represented as follows:

EXAMPLE 11.3.–
Let the function be 
.
Can this function be a probability density? If so, what should the value
of the coefficient α be? What is the probability that X is between  and
1?
Recall that for a function to be a probability density, it must satisfy the
following conditions: the function must always be positive, f(x) ≥ 0 for
all x, and the integral of the function over its domain must be equal to 1.
Firstly, f(x) ≥ 0 for all x if α is positive. Secondly, f(x) is continuous on
ℝ and is therefore a good candidate to be a probability density function.
To satisfy the second condition, determine α by ensuring that the
integral of all the function over its entire domain is equal to 1:
Hence, 
.
The graphical representation of f(x) is given in Figure 11.6.
Figure 11.6. Probability density.
What is the probability that 

11.2. Mathematical expectation, variance and
standard deviation
Definitions similar to those seen in statistics are used, but in probability
theory, the term “mathematical expectation” is employed instead of
“average”. The mathematical expectation is an average weighted by the
probability values.
Given a random variable X associated with a probability law p(X), the
average or mathematical expectation E(X) is defined differently depending
on whether the variable is discrete or continuous:
Mathematical expectation has linearity properties: for two random variables
X and Y, and real numbers α and β,
Moreover, if X and Y are independent variables, the joint probability p(X =
xi and Y = yj) can be written as p(X = xi)p(Y = yj). Consequently,
Consider X as a random variable with mathematical expectation E(X). The
variance υ(X) is defined as the weighted average of the squares of the
deviations from the mathematical expectation:

The standard deviation σ(X) is the square root of the variance:
These definitions align with those in statistics. A convenient expression for
calculating the variance is provided by the Huygens-Koenig theorem:
This theorem is straightforward to prove. For a discrete variable, the proof
is as follows. By definition,
Expanding this,
it follows that:
This result is often remembered as “mean of the square minus square of the
mean”, ensuring that the square of the mean is correctly subtracted from the
mean of the squares. If unsure, verify that the variance should not be
negative.

When X and Y are independent variables, the variance of their sum is
simply the sum of their variances. This can be shown as follows:
Therefore,
EXAMPLE 11.4.–
For the example of balls in a jar (example 11.1):
Given:
The variance υ(X) is calculated as:
The standard deviation σ(X) is the square root of the variance:

EXAMPLE 11.5.–
Returning to the example of choosing a point on a segment defined by
the interval [a, b].
Recall that the probability density function is: 
.
Expected value E(X):
which is a predictable result.
Expected value of X2, E(X2):
Calculating the standard deviation requires calculating E(X2) and
variance.
Variance υ(X):
The variance is calculated as follows:
Standard deviation σ(X):
Finally, the standard deviation is computed as follows:

EXAMPLE 11.6.–
Given the probability distribution from example 11.2:
Expected value E(X):
This is the amount in euros that the player loses on average.
Expected value of X2, E(X2):
Variance v(X):
The variance can therefore be calculated as follows:
Standard deviation σ(X):
Finally, the standard deviation is given by:

EXAMPLE 11.7.–
Given the continuous variable X with the probability density function
, the calculations for the expected value and variance are
as follows (example 11.3):
Expected value E(X):
For the first integral, change x to −x:
The expected value E(X) is 0, which aligns with the symmetry of f(x).
Expected value of X2, E(X2):
In the same way, 
By changing x to −x in the first integral, 
 and
integrating twice by parts, the following result is obtained:
Variance v(X) and standard deviation σ(X):
The variance:
and the standard deviation 
.
11.3. Distribution function
The distribution function of a probability law of a random variable X is
defined as:

The cumulative distribution function provides the probabilities that the
random variable X takes on a value less than or equal to x.
F(x) ranges between 0 and 1, as it represents the cumulative
probability from the smallest value of X (which could be −∞) up to x.
Since the total probability is 1 and all probabilities are non-negative,
F(x) is always an increasing function.
For a discrete random variable, F(x) is a “step” function, meaning it
has jumps at the points where the random variable X takes specific
values.
For a continuous random variable, F(x) is a continuous function,
reflecting the continuous nature of the underlying probability density.

EXAMPLE 11.8.–
For the discrete variable X in example 11.1, which takes the values 1, 2
and 3 with probabilities 
, 
 and 
, respectively.
Figure 11.7. Distribution function.
The cumulative distribution function F(x) can be determined as follows:
If x < 1, then F(x) = 0.
If 1 ≤ x < 2, then 
.
If 2 ≤ x < 3, then 
.
If x ≥ 3, then 
.
This representation is shown in Figure 11.7.

EXAMPLE 11.9.–
For the continuous random variable X with the probability density
function 
, the cumulative distribution function F(x) is
computed as follows:
The following two cases can be distinguished:
If x < 0, then 
.
If > 0, then 
.
This function shows the cumulative probability up to a point x and is
shown graphically in Figure 11.8.
Figure 11.8. Distribution function.
11.4. Usual probability laws
Some probability laws frequently encountered in experiments include the
uniform probability law, the binomial (or Bernoulli) law, Poisson’s law, the
exponential law and the normal (or Gaussian) law.
11.4.1. Uniform law
The uniform law is one of the simplest probability laws and is used to
model continuous random variables with probability density f(x) that is
constant over a given interval (a, b) and zero outside this interval. This law

ensures that each value within the interval has an equal probability of being
observed (see Figure 11.5). The density function is denoted as follows: f(x)
= C (where C is a constant) with the condition on the given interval (a, b):
This implies that the constant C can be calculated as follows: 
.
It is then straightforward to deduce (as calculated in example 11.5):
mathematical expectation: 
;
variance: 
;
standard deviation: 
.
If the interval (a, b) is (0, 1), then
11.4.2. Binomial or Bernoulli’s law
The binomial law is frequently used to model repeated experiments (trials)
of the same type with binary results. It is based on a Bernoulli scheme and
is associated with discrete random variables. In this law, it is assumed that
the trials are identical and independent of each other. This law was
illustrated in example 11.2., where a specific case of the binomial law was
studied, and probabilities of success in a certain number of repeated trials
were calculated.
In each trial of a binomial experiment, there are two possible results: the
event of interest, with an elementary probability p, and its complement,
with a probability q = 1 − p. When n trials are conducted, the number of
times the event of interest occurs is denoted by k. This value k is assigned to
a random variable X, which can take discrete values from 0 to n. Thus, in
the context of the binomial law, X represents the number of successes

(occurrences of the event of interest) in the n trials. It is a discrete random
variable that can take values between 0 and n, inclusive.
The probability law associated with the Bernoulli diagram is expressed by:
where 
 is the binomial coefficient defined by:
Recall Newton’s binomial formula on this subject.
Figure 11.9. Binomial law.
This formula guarantees us that the sum of all the probabilities of the
binomial law is equal to 1. Since q = 1 − p, it follows that (p + q)n = 1, and
therefore,

Figure 11.9 provides the graphical representation of this law for 
 and n
= 10.
Note that this law depends only on two parameters: n and p. Therefore, it is
sometimes denoted as B (n, p).
To calculate the mathematical expectation E(X):
The first term of the sum, for k = 0, is zero, so:
Change the index by letting h = (k − 1) and use Newton’s binomial formula.
This leads to the following:

It follows that the expectation E(x) is simply: E(X) = np.
To calculate the variance v(X), an alternative approach can be used.
Consider Xi as the random variable for an individual test. Here, Xi = 1 if the
expected event occurs and Xi = 0 if the opposite event occurs. Thus, Xi
follows Bernoulli’s law with a success probability p. The expected value is
E(Xi) = 1 × p + 0 × q = p, and the variance is v(Xi) = p × (1 − p)2 + q × (0 −
p)2 = pq(p + q) = pq.
The variable X of the Bernouilli scheme (n identical and independent trials)
can be considered as the sum of the variables X1, X2, …, Xn, each
corresponding to a single trial. The variables Xi are independent. Therefore:
This confirms the previous result. For the variance, since the variables Xi
are independent, the variance of X is:
Each Xi has the same variance pq, so:
11.4.3. Poisson’s law
Poisson’s law approximates the binomial distribution when the probability p
is small (e.g. p < 0.1) and the number of trials n is large. The probability
mass function of Poisson’s distribution is given by:

where m is a positive real number. To verify that the sum of all the
probabilities equals 1:
This confirms that the sum of all probabilities is indeed 1. Poisson’s
distribution depends on a single parameter, m. To find the mathematical
expectation:
rewriting k as k = h + 1, where h = k − 1:
The parameter m is therefore the mathematical expectation of the variable
X. To calculate the variance, first compute E(X2):
Let h = k − 1. Then,
In the remaining sum, let l = h − 1:

Therefore, the variance is:
The variance, like the mathematical expectation, is equal to m. The standard
deviation is:
Figure 11.10 graphically shows Poisson’s law for m = 1, m = 4, m = 10.
Tables provide the value of p(X = k) (see section 11.8.1. Appendix 1 for
details).
Figure 11.10. Poisson’s law.
11.4.4. Exponential law
The exponential law is a law for a continuous random variable with a
probability density function given by:
where λ is a positive real number.
To verify that the total probability is equal to 1, calculate the integral of the
probability density function over its entire range:

Thus, the total probability is indeed equal to 1.
Analogous to Poisson’s law, the exponential law depends on only one
parameter, λ, whose meaning becomes clear when calculating the following
mathematical expectation E(X):
Integrating by parts, with u = x and = λe−λx, results in:
Thus, λ is the inverse of the mathematical expectation.
To calculate the variance v(X):
Integrating twice by parts yields:
From this, the variance is:
The standard deviation is:

Figure 11.11 shows the probability density function for λ = 0.5.
Figure 11.11. Exponential law.
The exponential law is characteristic of memoryless systems, sometimes
referred to as the law of amnesia. Consider two instants on the time axis: t
and t + h (h ≥ 0). A random variable X is memoryless if it satisfies the
Markov property:
This means the probability for the time being greater than t + h does not
depend on t (no memory of the past state). Using the conditional
probability, this simplifies to:
Given the memoryless property:
With the properties of the exponential function:

Also:
This confirms that the exponential law satisfies the memoryless property
[P]. Furthermore, it can be demonstrated (accepted as true) that a
memoryless random variable follows the exponential law.
To illustrate this concretely, consider a scenario where individuals arrive in
a queue at an average rate of λ = 4 individuals per minute, with arrivals
following Poisson’s law. In this case, the time θ between two consecutive
arrivals has an average of 
 minute. This time θ follows an exponential
law with parameter λ = 4, corresponding to an average of  minute.
Poisson’s law and the exponential law are complementary and play
significant roles in queue simulation. Poisson’s law models the number of
arrivals within a given time frame, while the exponential law describes the
time between consecutive arrivals. Together, these laws provide a
comprehensive framework for analyzing and simulating queue behavior.
Furthermore, a relationship exists between the exponential law and
Poisson’s law. The following table illustrates this relationship:

Table 11.1. Comparison of Poisson’s law and exponential law
Occurrence of n events in
the interval [0, +∞[
Interval θ of time between two
consecutive events
Poisson’ law:
Exponential law: p(θ) = λe−λθ
Law for a discrete random
variable
Law for a continuous random variable
λ is the average occurrence
rate of events
1/λ is the average of the time intervals
separating two consecutive events
11.4.5. Normal law
The normal law, also known as Gauss’ law or Laplace–Gauss law, is one of
the best-known distributions in statistics and applies to continuous random
variables. Its probability density function is given by:
where m represents the mean (mathematical expectation) and σ represents
the standard deviation. The normal distribution is commonly denoted as
N(m, σ2).

Figure 11.12. Normal law.
The graphical representation of this probability density features a distinctive
“bell” curve shape. Figure 11.12 shows this for m = 10 and σ = 4.
Figure 11.13. p (X < x).
The probability that X < x is given by the following cumulative distribution
function of the normal distribution:
This probability is shown in Figure 11.13. In this graphical representation:
on the one hand, p(X ≤ x) is represented by the area under the curve y =
f(x). This area is bounded by the curve, the x-axis and the vertical line

at x (i.e. y = x);
on the other hand, p(X ≤ x) corresponds to the value of the cumulative
distribution function F(X), which gives the probability that the random
variable X takes on a value less than or equal to x.
In particular, the following properties can be verified:
a. Sum of the probabilities: the total area under the probability density
function is 1. This can be shown using the mathematical result:
By substituting
The integral becomes:
Simplifying gives:
b. Mathematical expectation: the mathematical expectation M is indeed
m. To calculate it, use the following formula:
Changing variables as before:

The second term in the above expression involves integrating an odd
function over ] − ∞; +∞[, which results in zero. Therefore, M = m.
c. The standard deviation is indeed σ. To calculate the variance υ(X):
Let 
, so 
. The integral becomes:
Integrate by parts by setting U = u, 
.
Thus, dU = du and 
which leads to:
Thus, σ is indeed the standard deviation.

Figure 11.14. p(a ≤ X ≤ b).
The probability that X is between two values is obtained as follows:
Thus:
This approach can be applied to expressions of the type p(X ≤ x) (see Figure
11.14). In particular, the following values are interesting:
Tables of the normal distribution (see Appendix 2) provide these quantities
for the standard normal distribution, which is introduced below.
The standard normal distribution corresponds to m = 0 and σ = 1:

It is obtained by changing variables, transitioning to standardized
coordinates:

EXAMPLE 11.10.–
For a population of 2,500 people, where the height is measured in cm,
the average height is m = 169 cm, and the height follows a normal
distribution with a standard deviation σ = 5.6 cm.
To find the probability that an individual’s height is less than 155 cm:
Calculate the z-score: 
Using the standard normal distribution tables, we find:
Thus, the probability that an individual’s height is less than 155 cm is
0.0062.
To find the probability that an individual’s height is greater than 172
cm:
Similarly, calculate the z-score:
Using the standard normal distribution tables, find:
From the tables: p(T < t) ≈ 0.7019, so
Therefore, the probability that an individual’s height is greater than 172
cm is approximately 0.2981.
To find the probability that an individual’s height is between 160 and
178 cm:

Calculate the z-scores for the endpoints, according to the interval 160 ≤
X ≤ 178:
Thus:
Using the standard normal distribution tables, we have:
Therefore, the probability that the height is between 160 and 178 cm is:
Thus, the probability that an individual’s height is between 160 and 178
cm is approximately 0.905.
To conclude on normal distribution, it is crucial to highlight its universal
character, as demonstrated by the central limit theorem. This theorem
asserts that, regardless of the original distribution of a population, the
distribution of the sample mean approaches a normal distribution as the
sample size becomes large enough. This property reveals the widespread
nature of the normal distribution across various fields and scenarios,
reinforcing its significance in statistical analysis and real-world
applications.

CENTRAL LIMIT THEOREM.–
Consider Xi to be a series of independent and identically distributed
random variables, each following the same probability law with mean μ
and standard deviation σ. Let the random variable X be defined by:
Then, when n is sufficiently large, the variable X approximately follows
a normal distribution with mean μ and standard deviation 
.

EXAMPLE 11.11.–
Let us provide a concrete justification for the central limit theorem.
Consider rolling a fair die and focus on the result “1”. The probability
of rolling a “1” (success) is 
, and the probability of not rolling a
“1” (failure) is 
. For this Bernoulli trial:
the mean (μ) is 
;
the standard deviation (σ) is given by 
. Thus:
A single throw of a die corresponds to a random variable Xi. For n
throws, each random variable Xi follows the same probability law
defined previously. For a sufficiently large n, such as n = 100, the
central limit theorem predicts that the variable 
 follows a
normal law with mean 
 and standard deviation 
.
For n = 100, this standard deviation is approximately 0.03727.
In practice, simulating this with a computer involves performing several
series of 100 dice throws and computing the average for each series.
Repeating this series of 100 throws 100 times yields an empirical mean
of approximately 0.165 and a standard deviation of about 0.039, which
are very close to the values predicted by the central limit theorem.
The distribution of these averages closely resembles the Gaussian
(normal) curve, confirming that even with 100 series of 100 throws
each, the results align closely with the prediction of the central limit
theorem.

Figure 11.15. Simulation result.
It is important to note that the central limit theorem makes no assumptions
about the specific probability law followed by each random variable Xi. The
theorem applies regardless of the underlying distribution, provided that the
variables are independent and identically distributed with a finite mean and
variance.
11.5. General information on simulation
Simulation is a popular technique for reproducing real-world events using a
computer (a modern approach, as earlier simulations were performed
manually). This method uses randomness, which might seem paradoxical at
first because randomness is typically viewed as inherently unpredictable.
The idea of incorporating chance into a simulation might suggest a mastery
over randomness, which is often thought to be impossible. And yet…
11.5.1. Weak law of large numbers
A fundamental mathematical result underlying simulation techniques is the
Law of Large Numbers. Intuitively, this law suggests that a statistical result
should approximate the notion of probability. It forms the basics of
statistics, which, by analyzing large samples (or, in mathematical terms,

large numbers), aims to estimate the probability of events. But what exactly
constitutes “large” in this context?
Two fundamental theorems justify this intuition: the Weak Law of Large
Numbers (originally developed by Jacques Bernoulli) and the Strong Law of
Large Numbers. To understand these laws, it is necessary to define what is
meant by the convergence of statistical frequency towards probability.
The Weak Law of Large Numbers, on the contrary, asserts that the
probability of the empirical average deviating from the theoretical average
becomes increasingly smaller as the sample size grows. In other words,
with a sufficiently larger sample, the empirical average will “almost surely”
approach the theoretical average.
The Strong Law of Large Numbers, on the contrary, asserts that the
probability of the empirical average deviates from the theoretical average
becomes increasingly smaller as the sample size grows. In other words,
with a sufficiently sample, the empirical average “almost surely”
approaches the theoretical average.
In the case of rolling a die, it is expected that if the number of times “1”
appears is averaged over a large number of rolls, the result should
approximate 
, which is the probability p of rolling a “1”. To formalize
this, introduce the random variable Xi, which takes the value “1” if “1”
appears on the i-th throw, and 0 otherwise.
Define the statistical frequency fn as the average of the results obtained
from n throws:
where xi is the result of the i-th throw.
The statistical frequency fn represents the proportion of times of “1” appears
among the n throws. According to the Law of Large Numbers, as the
number of throws n becomes large, this statistical frequency should
approach the theoretical probability 
. Thus, with an increasing number
of throws, fn should get closer and closer to the theoretical probability of the

rolling a “1”. This convergence is a key result of probability theory and
justifies the expectation that the frequency of occurrence of “1” converges
to  when the number of throws is sufficiently large.
To provide a practical mathematical result related to this convergence, we
consider the Bienaymé–Chebyshev inequality. Consider a random variable
X with mean μ and standard deviation σ, taking discrete values x1., x2, … .,
xn with corresponding probabilities p1, p2, … ., pn. Its variance is given by:
Now, focus on the event A defined by |X − μ| ≥ ε, where “ε” is a positive
real number. Let i(A) denote the indices i that correspond to this event. It
follows that:
As a result
Hence, the Bienaymé–Chebyshev inequality is:
Consider the following random variable
defined as the average of a series of independent random variables Xi with
the same probability law (mean μ and standard deviation σ). For this

variable, the mathematical expectation and variance are given by:
Applying the Bienaymé–Chebyshev inequality to 
 yields
The complement of the event 
 is 
. Therefore,
As ε > 0 and n tends to infinity (∞), 
 approaches 0. Thus, the probability
 approaches 1, indicating that the probability of 
 being
within ∈ of μ approaches certainty. This result demonstrates the weak law
of large numbers.
WEAK LAW OF LARGE NUMBERS.–
Consider a sequence of independent and identically distributed random
variables, each with mean μ and standard deviation σ. Let 
 be defined
as the average of thee first n random variables in the sequence:
Then, for every ε > 0, as n tends to infinity (∞), the probability
 tends to 1.
This theorem implies that it is highly improbable for the difference 
to be greater than ε when n is large. In simpler terms, 
 converges to μ in
probability as n approaches infinity. It is important to note that this result,
initially established by Bernoulli, concerns the limit of probability.

For practical applications, consider an experiment in which a particular
event A is expected. For this experiment, associate a random variable Xi
(where the index i accounts for different trials of the experiment) that takes
the value 1 if event A occurs and the value 0 if event A does not occur. The
mathematical expectation of the variable Xi is defined as follows:
If the experiment is repeated n times and the statistical frequency fn, which
corresponds to the empirical mean 
, is calculated, the weak law of large
numbers indicates that as n becomes sufficiently large, it is very likely that
fn will be close to E(Xi), which is the theoretical probability p(A). In other
words, the statistical frequency and the theoretical probability should be
similar for very large n, reflecting the practical principle of the weak law of
large numbers.
However, it is important to note that the weak law of large numbers does
not claim that the statistical frequency fn converges to the probability p(A)
as n becomes very large. Instead, it states that as n becomes very large, the
probability that the absolute difference between the statistical frequency fn
and the theoretical probability p(A) is less than a given ∈ tends to 1. This
means that fn and p(A) will be close for a sufficiently large n.
11.5.2. Some simulations
In this section, several examples will be presented to illustrate how a
simulation operates in practice.

EXAMPLE 11.12.–
Take the famous example of estimating the value of π devised by
Buffon (1707–1788). This naturalist and mathematician designed an
experiment to estimate π as follows:
The experiment involves throwing a needle of length L onto a floor
composed of parallel strips with a uniform width d. The number of
needle throws is denoted by N, and the number of times the needle
crosses the gaps between the strips is denoted by n. Buffon
demonstrated (see Appendix 3) that the probability of the needle
crossing a gap between the strips is given by 
 when d > L. Therefore,
for a large number of throws N, the ratio  should approach. This allows
for the approximation value of π using the formula: 
.
Buffon conducted this experiment manually, as computers did not exist
in his time. Today, computers can be used to perform this simulation.
For instance, with the parameter L = 6, d = 3, and N = 1,000, a single
simulation might yield an approximation of π = 3.02543. To improve
accuracy, it is necessary to repeat the experiment many times and
average the results obtained.

EXAMPLE 11.13.–
Here is another example illustrating the use of chance. Suppose the goal
is to estimate the area of a surface bounded by a closed curve, such as a
disk centered at the origin with radius R. Theoretically, the area of the
disk is given by A = πR2. Now, consider that this disk is inscribed in a
square with side length 2R, as shown in Figure 11.16.
Figure 11.16. Areas for throwing points.
The area of the square is also known and is given by: = (2R)2 = 4R2.
To estimate the area of the disk, a computer can be used to randomly
and uniformly choose points (x, y) within the square. Specifically,
values for x and y will be generated such that 0 ≤ x ≤ 2 and 0 ≤ y ≤ 2.
Suppose N points are randomly thrown, and n of those points are
identified as being inside the disk. The points that lie inside the disk
must satisfy the condition x2 + y2 < R2. Given that the distribution of
points within both the square and the disk is uniform, the number of
points inside the disk is proportional to the area of the disk. Thus, 
, where A is the area of the disk and B is the area of the square.
Since B = 4R2, the area of the disk A can be calculated as:

This provides an “experimental” value of the area of a disk. Given that
the theoretical area of the disk is 4R2, the “experimental” value of π can
be approximated by:
For example, with N = 500 points, an experiment yields an approximate
value of π = 3.152. Repeating the experiment, a second time results in π
= 3.04, and a third time yields π = 3.216. This process is continued up to
10 times. Taking the average of the results gives π ≈ 3.114, which is a
reasonably close approximation to the “theoretical” value of π.

EXAMPLE 11.14.–
Calculate the area of the surface limited by a Bernoulli lemniscate. This
is a well-known curve, although its name might not be familiar: it is the
shape of the infinity symbol (see Figure 11.17). The equation of this
curve is:
Figure 11.17. Bernoulli’s lemniscate.
This figure is symmetrical with respect to the origin. To find the total
area, first calculate the area in the first quadrant (see Figure 11.18) and
then multiply by 4.
To generate points, use a uniform distribution to obtain two random
numbers, x and y, such that x ∈ [0, a], and y ∈ [0, a/2]. This ensures
that the points lie within a rectangle R with sides a and a/2. Repeat this
process N times and count the number n of points that fall within the
area of the surface, which is shown in dark gray. The points within this
region must satisfy the following conditions:
Figure 11.18. Definition of zones for simulation.

Since the distribution of points is uniform, let A be the area of interest.
The proportion of points inside the region to the total number of points
is given by:
Solving for A:
This formula enables the calculation of the area A from n, N, and a.
By choosing a sufficiently large N, the result should approximate A ≈
a2, which corresponds to the expected theoretical result. This also
implies that A/4 is half the area of the rectangle R.

EXAMPLE 11.15.–
Consider the following game. A player starts with 1 euro. They roll a
die, and if the result is even, they win 1 euro; if the result is odd, they
lose 1 euro. The game continues until the player has either 0 euros or 5
euros. The goal is to determine the average duration of the game,
expressed in the number of dice throws. To estimate this, a simulation
program can be used, which can be represented by the following
algorithm:
Input N // number of parts
S = 0 // accumulation of durations j obtained in the games
For i = 1 to N
      j = 0
      M = 1 // initial amount
      While (M > 0 and M < 5) // while M  and M 
           j = j + 1
           X = unif(1, 6) // uniform law
           If (X even)
                M = M + 1 // increase in amount
           Otherwise
                M = M − 1 // decrease in amount
           End if
      EndWhile
      S = S + j // accumulation of durations
EndFor
R = S/N // average of game durations
The function unif (1,6) generates a random integer between 1 and 6,
according to a uniform distribution. To implement the simulation, the
algorithm must be translated into a programming (see below). It is
advisable to use a sufficiently large number N, for example, at least
10,000, to obtain reliable results. Below is an example of Python code
to implement this simulation, with different executions varying the
value of N.
import random
# Entering the number of games to play / launch
N = int(input("Enter the value of N = ")) # We use the 
variable S to calculate the accumulation of durations j 
obtained in the games

S = 0
for i in range(1, N + 1):
    j = 0
    M = 1 # Initial availability, here 1 euro
    while M > 0 and M < 5:
        j += 1
        X = random.randint(1, 6) # Generating a random 
number between
        1 and 6
          if X % 2 == 0: M += 1 # Increase in amount
          else: M −= 1 # Decrease in amount
          S += j # We calculate the accumulation of 
durations
          R = S / N # We calculate the average of the 
durations
# Displaying the game average result
print("The average duration of the game (in number of dice 
rolls) = ", R)
With N = 10,000, the following results were obtained from three
executions:
For execution 1:
Entering N = 10,000
Average game duration (in number of dice rolls) = 4.0174
For execution 2:
Entering N = 10,000
Average game duration (in number of dice rolls) = 4.0677
For execution 3:
Entering N = 10,000
Average game duration (in number of dice rolls) = 4.0131
In the same way, if we wish to increase the number N, by setting N =
106, we obtain the following results:
For execution 1:
Entering N = 1,000,000
Average game duration (in number of dice rolls) = 4.004777

For execution 2:
Entering N = 1,000,000
Average game duration (in number of dice rolls) = 4.005863
For execution 2:
Entering N = 1,000,000
Average game duration (in number of dice rolls) = 4.005863
From the two values associated with N (N = 104 and N = 106), we can
note a better approximation for the largest value of N.
The examples provided above illustrate several characteristics of numerical
simulation:
a. A computer is used for its practicality in performing calculations and,
more importantly, for avoiding real experiments. In all examples,
random numbers are generated, and favorable and possible cases are
counted.
b. Statistical frequency is approximated to probability when the
conditions of the law of large numbers are met.
c. It becomes evident that obtaining significant results requires a large
number of experiments (and averaging the results). This approach
aligns with the concept of statistical frequency approaching probability
(as supported by the law of large numbers) and justifies the use of a
computer for handling repetitive tasks.
d. Generating random numbers with a computer, which is inherently
deterministic, presents a challenge. This case will be examined in the
next section.
The process of generating random numbers to simulate events is commonly
referred to as the Monte Carlo method, named after the casino in Monte
Carlo city.

11.5.3. Generation of random numbers
As showed in the previous examples, simulation relies on the use of random
numbers to generate artificial samples.
Before the advent of computers, and even today, tables of random numbers
derived from physical phenomena governed by chance, such as radioactive
decay, were used. A well-known example from this era is a table produced
by the Rand Corporation in 1955. This table was generated by observing the
results of an electronic device functioning similarly a casino roulette. These
tables were used to extract sequences of random numbers. For instance,
consider the Rand Corporation table containing 100,000 digits:
5836093758731238530596885126543129874560985432578904326872109
5010285730265742892
These numbers can then be grouped into pairs to obtain random numbers
ranging from 00 to 99:
58 36 09 37 58 73 12 38 53 05 96 88 51 26 54 31 29 87 45 60 98 54 32 57
89 04 32 68 72 10 95 01 02 85 73 02 65 74 28 92
Alternatively, to obtain random numbers ranging from 000 to 999, the
numbers can be grouped into triples:
583 609 375 873 123 853 059 688 512 654 312 987 456 098 543 257 890
432 687 210 950 102 857 302 657 428
In 1939, Kendall and Babington-Smith created a random number table by
photographing the numbers on a roulette wheel.
Today, computers are primarily used to generate random numbers, although
these are actually pseudo-random, as they are computed rather than truly
random. Programming languages provide functions to generate pseudo-
random numbers. For example, in JavaScript, the Math.random() function
returns a number between 0 (inclusive) and 1 (exclusive). To obtain a
number between a and b (b > a), the following expression can be used: (b –
a) * Math. random() + a. In PHP, the rand() function generates an integer
between 0 and getrandmax() by default. By providing arguments, such as
rand(a, b), it returns an integer between a and b (inclusive).

There are several methods for generating these pseudo-random numbers.
All of these methods produce numbers following a uniform distribution. Let
us explore two of these methods, among many others, and also a third, less
conventional one.
Mid-square process
This process involves choosing an initial number u0 composed of 2m digits.
The number is squared, resulting in a number with 4m digits. From this
result, the 2m central digits are extracted to obtain the number u1. The
process is then repeated with u1 to get u2, etc. Here is an example
illustrating this process:
This generates the following sequence: 763732374781857959929040 ….
Fibonacci process
Start with three numbers u0, u1 and k, where k is larger than the first two
numbers. Generate a sequence of random numbers using the following
procedure:
For example, let u0 = 3,765, u1 = 1,529, and k = 1,6245. The calculations
proceed as follows:

Next, eliminate the first and last digit of each result, yielding the following
sequence:
376152529682211269481126….
Decimal places of π
The irrationality of π implies that the sequence of its decimal places shows
no periodicity and appears completely disordered. While this suggests that
this sequence of decimal places could be considered a sequence of random
numbers, proving this rigorously remains a challenge. Nonetheless, this
sequence is often used in simulations and computations However, in
practice, computers typically do not use this sequence directly.
As of now, 62,800 billion decimal places of π are known. Here are the first
100 of these known decimal places.
π =
3.14159265358979323846264338327950288419716939937510582097494
4 5923078164062862089986280348253421170679
11.6. Generating programs
Generating random numbers that follow a specific probability distribution is
essential for conducting simulations. These random numbers will form
samples for the simulation. Initially, consider common probability
distributions, where the cumulative distribution function is particularly
useful. Next, address the general case for any probability distribution. The
importance of the distribution function can be illustrated for both discrete
and continuous variables (see Figure 11.19).

Figure 11.19. Using the distribution function.
The method is as follows:
1. Uniformly choose a number z between 0 and 1.
2. Use the distribution function F(x) to determine the number α that
follows the corresponding probability law (i.e. such that F(α) = z).
This approach allows for the generation of random samples that conform to
the desired probability distribution. The key problem is in inverting the
function F(x), since α is obtained from α = F−1(z).
11.6.1. Usual laws
Previously, it was demonstrated how computers can generate random
numbers (in fact, pseudo-random numbers) following a uniform
distribution. This will serve as the basis for generating random numbers
according to other probability laws.
Binomial law
For the binomial distribution, given a value of z (from the uniform
distribution), it corresponds to the number α (following the binomial
distribution) such that

Poisson’s laws
Poisson’s distribution describes a discrete random variable. Given a random
number z (from the uniform distribution), the number α (following
Poisson’s distribution) is determined by the condition
Exponential law
The exponential distribution is for a continuous variable with a probability
density function given by
The cumulative distribution function is
The inversion is straightforward. For a number z (uniformly distributed
between 0 and 1), the value α (following the exponential distribution) is
given by:
Normal law
There are several methods for simulating a normal distribution. One
common approach is described here. Directly inverting the distribution
function is difficult. Therefore, alternative algorithms are used. One simple
method is:

where zi are numbers generated from a uniform distribution between 0 and
1, and m and σ are the mean and standard deviation of the normal
distribution to be simulated.
11.6.2. Any probability law
Consider a practical situation where the probability distribution is unknown,
but statistical data is available. Imagine a counter where customers arrive,
and measurements of the number of arriving customers are taken every 15
minutes. After conducting 1,000 measurements, the resulting frequencies of
customer arrivals are displayed in Figure 11.20. These frequencies are
provided to two decimal places.
Figure 11.20. Any probability law
Assume that this statistic approximates the probability distribution of
customer arrivals, which is unknown. The average number of arrivals is λ =
4.77 arrivals per quarter hour. Suppose that measurements were also taken
of the number of customers served per quarter hour. A total of 100
measurements provide the statistical results (table) shown in Figure 11.21.
Figure 11.21. Any probability law
Assume that this statistic represents the probability distribution of services
(or departures). The average number of services is m = 4.91 per quarter
hour. To study this waiting system and estimate, through simulation, the
average queue length of customers waiting to be served, complete the
previous two tables by associating a range of two-digit numbers with each
frequency, as shown in Figure 11.22. The size of each range should be

proportional to the frequency. For instance, for an arrival count of 3 with a
frequency of 0.23, multiplying by 100 gives an integer of 23. Given that 12
was the last value for the previous arrival count, create a range of 13
numbers from 13 to 35.
Figure 11.22. Using number ranges
The meaning of these numbers is as follows. Suppose two random
sequences are generated using a computer:
Sequence S1: 90 27 80 39 52 98 24 79 …
Sequence S2: 72 71 67 53 43 97 30 98 …
Figure 11.23. Arrivals and departures table
For the first quarter-hour, draw 90 for arrivals and 72 for departures.
According to the arrivals table, the number 90 corresponds to eight
arrivals table, while 72 corresponds six departures.

For the second quarter-hour, draw 27 for arrivals and 71 for departures.
In the arrivals table, 27 corresponds to three arrivals, and 71
corresponds to six departures.
Continuing in this manner, create a table showing, arrivals and
departures for each quarter-hour, as shown in Figure 11.23.
In this table, by calculating the difference between the number of arrivals
and the number of services (i.e. departures), the length of the queue is
obtained. If the difference is positive, it represents the length of the queue;
if negative, the queue length is zero.
With a sufficiently large number of values for S1 and S2 (i.e. a large sample
size), the average queue lengths can be determined, providing the desired
result. To ensure a reliable result, consider the following precautions:
1. Number of periods: ensure that there are a sufficiently large number of
periods, at least 100. It is also recommended to repeat the simulation
multiple times and average the results to obtain a more accurate
estimate.
2. Edge effects: in the given example, the waiting system is not “open-
ended”. For instance, the service only during specific hours, such as an
8-hour workday. It is therefore important to account for “edge” effects.
To address these, discard results from the beginning and end of the
simulation period retaining only those that reflect the system’s stable,
or “steady-state”, regime.
11.7. M/M/1 waiting system
Waiting phenomena are prevalent in daily life (such as waiting at counters
or experiencing traffic jams), and they significantly impact economic, social
and financial aspects. Waiting systems are studied through various models
that share certain common characteristics.
A waiting system typically consists of a queue where customers wait and
one or more stations that perform the required services (see Figure 11.24).

Figure 11.24. M/M/1 waiting system
In a queuing system, individuals enter the queue from a source, which can
be either infinite (open systems) or finite (closed systems). They advance in
line according to a specific order of priority and are directed to a station
where they receive individual service. Once the service is complete, they
leave the station. The arrival and departure processes are governed by
probabilistic laws, which may differ from one another.
The interesting case is that of equilibrium, where the queue neither grows
indefinitely nor remains perpetually empty. The waiting system is subject to
a process of arrivals (births) and departures (deaths), and understanding this
balance is crucial for comprehending the overall functioning of the system.
Two key parameters, which are often random, influence the behavior of the
system over time:
Arrival rate: the frequency (or rate) of arrival of individuals.
Service duration: the duration of service.
Arrival frequency represents the rate at which individuals enter the waiting
system. It may vary depending on various factors such as time of day, day
of the week or other relevant variables. Duration of service refers to the
time required to serve each individual before they leave the station. This
duration may also be subject to random variations.
One of the simplest waiting systems is the M/M/1 system. The first “M”
indicates the exponential distribution of arrival times, meaning the time
intervals between consecutive arrivals (which therefore follow an
exponential distribution). The second “M” signifies that the duration of
services also follows an exponential distribution. The number “1” indicates

that there is a single service station, which implies the existence of a single
queue.
Additionally, it is assumed that the waiting system is open, meaning that
there is a continuous flow of arrivals. The priority rule in the queue is FIFO
(First-In, First-Out): individuals are served in the queue according to the
order of their arrival.
It is important to remember that if a variable follows an exponential
distribution, its inverse follows a Poisson distribution. In other words, if the
time between two consecutive arrivals follows an exponential distribution
with a mean of , then the frequency of arrivals follows a Poisson
distribution with a mean λ. Similarly, if the duration of a service follows an
exponential distribution with a mean of  then the frequency of departures
or services follows a Poisson distribution with a mean of μ.
Thus, the M/M/1 system can be analyzed from two equivalent perspectives,
as shown in Figure 11.25.
Figure 11.25. Two equivalent ways of seeing a waiting system
11.7.1. Theoretical study
Consider the time interval from t to t + h, where h is a very small positive
duration (time). It can be hypothesized that during this interval h, at most
one arrival or departure occurs (the “rare events” hypothesis). Therefore, if

there are n individuals in the system at t + h, there are only four possible
scenarios for the system at time t:
n individuals at time t: no arrivals and no departures or one arrival and
one departure during the duration (interval) h.
n − 1 individuals at time t: one arrival during the interval h.
n + 1 individuals at time t: one departure during the interval h.
Let pn(t) denote the probability of having n individuals in the system at time
t. To describe the evolution of the system at time t + h, the compound
probabilities can be used
where ρn,m(h) represents the probability of transitioning from a state with n
individuals to a state with m individuals during the interval h. This
probability expression accounts for all three possible cases. The process is
represented as a Markov chain where the states are the number of
individuals in the waiting system (see Figure 11.26).
Figure 11.26. Markov process
The probability ρn,n(h) is approximately greater as h becomes larger. This
leads to the following approximations:
Since the sum of the transition probabilities must be equal to 1, it follows
that:

where O(h) represents terms that become negligible (tend to 0) as h
approaches 0. The parameter λn is the “birth rate” and generally depends on
the current state n. For simplicity, λn is assumed to be constant (so λn = λ).
Similarly, μn is the death rate also assumed to be constant (so μn= μ).
With these notations, the probability pn(t + h) for n > 0 is expressed as:
Rearranging and dividing by h gives:
Taking the limit as h approaches 0, the term O(h) becomes negligible, and
the equation simplifies to:
The primary focus is on the equilibrium state, where the system reaches a
steady-state. In this case, the probabilities associated with the different
states of the system no longer depend on time:
The second equation allows p1 to be expressed in terms of p0:

Using the first equation and applying induction:
And so forth:
To determine p0, use the normalization condition:
Assuming Ψ < 1 (this will be justified later):
Thus:
At this stage, the relationship is between the parameters λ and μ from the
previous calculations, and the average rates of arrivals and departures
become clear. These parameters represent the average rates themselves. For
instance (see example 11.15.), if pk(t) represents the probability of having k
arrivals from time 0 to time t, this probability follows Poisson’s law in the
M/M/1 system:
The expected number of arrivals E(k) is given by:

By differentiating this with respect to λt and multiplying by λt, the result is:
The parameter λ therefore represents the mean arrival rate, i.e. the mean
number of arrivals per unit of time. Similarly, μ represents the mean
departure rate.
From the relationship obtained for the probability pn, the following results
can be derived (see section 11.8.4, Appendix 4):
The average number of individuals in the waiting system is 
.
The average number of people in the queue is 
.
The average time spent by an individual in the system is 
.
The average time spent by an individual in the queue is 
.
It is observed that ts − tF =  which corresponds to the average duration of a
service.
The assumption that λ < μ is justified because, for the queue to remain
stable and not grow indefinitely, the arrival rate must be less than the
departure rate. Thus, on average, λ < μ.

EXAMPLE 11.16.–
A bank office in a small town has only one teller. The arrival rate is
three customers per hour. The average service duration is 15 minutes (or
¼ hour). The time between two consecutive arrivals follows an
exponential distribution with parameter λ (hence, the average time
between arrivals is 
), and the service duration follows an exponential
distribution with parameter μ (hence, the average service time is 
).
This represents an M/M/1 waiting system with λ = 3 and μ = 4. The
waiting system is “viable” because λ < μ or Ψ < 1.
Theoretical results indicate the following:
The average number of customers in the bank is 
 = 3
customers.
The average number of customers in the queue is 
 = 2.25
customers.
The average time spent by a customer in the bank is 
 = 1
hour.
The average time spent by a customer in the queue is 
hour = 45 minutes.
It is verified that ts – tF = 15 minutes.
11.7.2. Simulation
The basic data are the average arrival rate λ and the average departure (or
service) rate μ, assuming an M/M/1 system. Figure 11.27 describes a typical
situation with nine elements. N individuals, numbered 1, 2, 3, .... N, are
successively entered into the waiting system. For each individual k > 1, the
following are defined or calculated:

The time difference between two successive arrivals, I[k] is generated
randomly according to an exponential law with parameter λ.
The arrival date, da[k], is calculated as the sum of the previous
individual’s arrival date, da[k − 1], and I[k]. For the first individual,
da[1] is set to 0. Thus, da[k] = da[k − 1] + I[k], and for k = 1, da[1] =
0.
Figure 11.27. nS, nF: number of individuals in the system and in the
queue
The duration of the service, D[k], is randomly generated according to
an exponential law with parameter μ.
The start date of service, ds[k], determined by taking the greater value
between the departure date of the previous individual, dd[k − 1], and
the individual’s arrival date k, da[k]. If da[k] > dd[k − 1], the station is
free, and the service can start immediately. If da[k] < dd[k − 1], service
will begin only after the departure of the (k − 1)th individual. In other
words, ds[k] = max{dd[k − 1],da[k]}, where dd[k − 1] is the departure
date of the (k − 1)th individual.
The departure date, dd[k], is calculated by adding the duration of
service, D[k], to the service start date, ds[k]. In other words, dd[k] =
ds[k] + D[k].
The time spent by the individual k in the queue, tF[k], is calculated as
the difference between the service start date, ds[k], and the arrival date,

da[k]. In other words, tF[k] = ds[k] − da[k].
The time spent by the individual k in the waiting system, tS[k], is
calculated as the difference between the departure date, dd[k], and the
arrival date, da[k]. In other words, tS[k] = dd[k] − da[k].
For the first individual, who is first to enter the waiting system, the initial
values are da[1] = 0, ds[1] = 0, dd[1] = ds[1] + D[1], tF[1] = 0, and tS[1] =
dd[1] − da[1].
From the tables tF[k] and tS[k], the average values tF and tS can be
calculated as follows:
Summarize the algorithm that handles the timing of events and the
calculation of tF and tS:
ttf=0 // total queue time
tts=0 // total system waiting time
For k = 1 to N
    If k = 1
           I[1]=0
           da[1]=0
           ds[1]=0
           D[1]=genexp(m)
           dd[1]=D[1]
           tf[1]=0 // wait time
           tS[1]=dd[1]=da[1] // presence time in the system
           ttf=ttf+tf[1]
           tts = tts + ts[1]
    Otherwise
           I[k]=genexp(l)
           da[k]=da[k-1]+I[k]
           ds[k]= max{dd[k-1], da[k]}
           D[k]=genexp(m)
           dd[k]=ds[k]+D[k]
           tf[k]=ds[k]-da[k] // wait time
           tS[k]=dd[k]-da[k] // presence time in the system
           ttf=ttf+tf[k]
           tts = tts + ts[k]

    End if
EndFor
In this algorithm, tF and tS represent the average waiting time in the queue
and the average presence time spent in the system, respectively.
The algorithm uses the function genexp(x), which generates a random
number following the exponential distribution:
where z = unif(0,1). The function unif(0,1). returns a random number
uniformly distributed between 0 and 1.
Calculating the average number nF of individuals in the queue and the
average number nS of individuals in the waiting system is less
straightforward. This is because the durations during which there are values
for the number of individuals in the queue and in the system need to be
considered such as durations 2, 1, 1 and 3, as shown in Figure 11.27. The
key dates are provided in the tables da[k],dd[k] and ds[k].
These three lists can be merged while maintaining chronological order and
noting whether each date corresponds to an arrival, a, a start of service, s, or
a departure, d. Multiple events can occur at the same date (e.g. date 12 in
Figure 11.27, which represents an arrival, a start of service and a departure).
In such cases, events are processed in the order: arrival (da), departure (dd)
and start of service (ds). Identical dates should be included and considered
as separate events.
For example, from Figure 11.27, the tables in Figure 11.28 show sorted
dates from da, ds and dd, with the corresponding events listed in line E.
To determine the average number of intervals, represent the consecutive
time intervals with their length, starting and ending events, as shown in
Figure 11.29. In these tables, a, s and d denote an arrival, a start of service
and a departure, respectively. Note that there are intervals of zero length
corresponding to identical dates of different events.

Figure 11.28. Timelines
To determine the number nS of individuals present in the system during an
interval, add 1 each time an interval begins with an arrival and subtract 1
each time an interval begins with a departure.
Figure 11.29. Consecutive time intervals
Figure 11.30. Completed tables
Likewise, to determine the number of individuals nF in the queue during an
interval, add 1 each time an interval begins with an arrival and subtract 1
each time an interval begins with a start of service. Figure 11.30 shows the
completed tables.
The weighted averages are then calculated using the following formulas:

where i denotes an interval, d[i] is its duration, nS[i] is the number of
individuals in the system, and nF[i] is the number of individuals in the
queue.
The algorithm below follows the one given above, with the tables da,dd,
and ds now being known.
L = concatenation of lists da, dd, ds
For k=1 to N
    Le[k]="a"
    Le[k+N]="d"
    Le[k+2*N]="s"
EndFor
//LL= sorted list of L according to the values of L[h] for h=1 
to 3*N
//LLe = sorted list of LLe in the same order as LL
// list of time intervals
i = 0 // number of intervals between two consecutive events
nS=0 // number of individuals present in interval i
nF=0 // number of individuals waiting in interval i
T[i][1]=0 // low value of the 1st interval
T[i][2]=0 // high value of the 1st interval
T[i][3]=0 // duration of the 1st interval
T[i][4]="a" // event of the start of the 1st interval
T[i][5]="s" // end of 1st interval event
T[i][6]=0//number of individuals in system during the i 
interval
T[i][7]=0 //number of individuals waiting during the interval i
For h = 1 to 3*N-1
    i=i+1 // interval number
    T[i][1]=LL[h] // low value of the interval
    T[i][2]=LL[h+1] // high value of the interval
    T[i][3]=T[i][h+1]-T[i][h] //interval duration
    T[i][4]=LLe[h] // event for low value
    T[i][5]=LLe[h+1] // event for the high value
    If T[i][4]="a" // an individual enters the system
           nS=nS+1
           nF=nF+1
    End if
    T[i][6]=nS // number of presents during the interval
    T[i][7]=nF // number of patients during the interval If

    T[i][4]="d" // an individual leaves the system
           nS=nS-1
    End if
    T[i][6]=nS
    If T[i][4]="s" // an individual leaves the queue
           nF=nF-1
    End if
    T[i][7]=nF
EndFor
M=i
//calculation of averages
TnS = 0
TnF=0
For i=1 to M
  TnS=TnS+T[i][6]*T[i][3]//cumulative products 
duration×individuals presents
  TnF=TnF+T[i][7]*T[i][3]//cumulative products 
duration×individuals waiting
EndFor
mnS=TnS/LL[3*N] // average number of individuals present in the 
system
mnF=TnF/LL[3*N] // average number of individuals waiting

EXAMPLE 11.17.–
Concretely, by using a program based on the previously described
algorithms and repeating the experiment 20 times with 110 individuals
in an M/M/1 type waiting system, with an arrival rate of λ = 3 arrivals
per unit time and a service rate of μ = 4 services per unit time, the
results are similar to those presented in the table in Figure 11.31.
To ensure a steady state, the first five and last five individuals are
eliminated, resulting in a sample of 100 individuals.
The benefit of conducting a large number of experiments (potentially
more than 20) is evident, as results can vary significantly between
experiments. The primary interest is in the average values obtained.
Comparing these values to the theoretical values for an M/M/1 queue,
as given in example 11.16 (tS = 1, tF = 0.75, nS = 3 and nF =2.25),
shows that the obtained values are relatively close, with for tS and tF
aligning more closely than ns and nF.
Calculating the standard deviations σtS, σtF, σnS, and σnF, from the table
in Figure 11.31, reveals that the theoretical values tS, tF,nS and nF fall
within the following ranges:
where t'S, t'F, n'S andn'F are the values obtained through simulation.

Figure 11.31. Results
11.8. Appendices
11.8.1. Appendix 1: Table for Poisson’s law


11.8.2. Appendix 2: Table for normal law


11.8.3. Appendix3: Button’s needle
The probability that the needle will pass through a gap between the slats
needs to be calculated. Assuming the parquet floor is perfect; the impact
location is irrelevant since all the parquet slats have equivalent properties.
Thus, the problem can be approached using two random variables.
Considering horizontal slats and focusing on a specific slat (see Figure
11.32), the calculation proceeds as follows:
The distance y of the needle’s lowest point from the upper dividing
line is the first random variable, taking values between 0 and d.
The angle θ of the needle relative to the horizontal is the second
random variable, taking values between 0 and π.
Figure 11.32. Geometry of the problem
It is straightforward to determine that the needle crosses the upper
separation if y < L sin(θ). This relationship can be shown graphically:
Figure 11.33(a) shows the various possible points (light gray rectangle)
when y and θ are chosen randomly, assuming the selection follows a
uniform probability distribution.

[11.1]
Figure 11.33. Different scenarios
Case (d > L) (see Figure 11.33(b)):
The curve y < L sin(θ) forms a sinusoid arc, and the region below this curve
(shown in dark gray) represents the situations where the needle intersects
the separation. The probability of this occurrence is the ratio of the area of
the dark gray region to the area of the rectangle (with part of the rectangle
covered by the dark gray region). The area of the rectangle is (dπ); the area
of the dark gray portion is given by:
Thus, the probability is:
Case (d < L) (see Figure 11.33(c)):
The calculation is more involved. The dark gray area must be divided into
three parts with areas A1, A2 and A3:
where 
. The resulting probability is then:

[11.2]
To perform the simulation (nowadays done with a computer), randomly
select a value of y between 0 and d and a value of θ between 0 and π, then
check if y < L sin(θ). If, out of N trials, n trials meet this condition, the
probability can be estimated using the law of large numbers approximating
the probability to the statistical frequency (f = n/N ≈ p):
If d > L: 
If d < L: 
11.8.4. Appendix 4: Results for M/M/1
Calculation of nS
But since Ψ < 1,
Thus:
Calculation of tF
If an individual arrives in the system, waiting is necessary until all
individuals who arrived before have been served. Given that there are on
average nS individuals in the system, the total time required to serve these

individuals is equal to the product of nS the average length of service time,
which is 
. Thus:
Calculation of ts
An individual spends time tS in the system, which is the sum of the waiting
time in the queue tF and the average duration of a service 
. Therefore,
Calculation of nF
If there are n people in the system, then there are (n - 1) people in the
queue. To express the average number of people in the queue, nF, use the
following approach:
However:
Simplify to:

OceanofPDF.com

References
[BAD 02] BADRIKIAN J., Codes correcteurs, Ellipses, Paris, 2002.
[BEL 94] BELLOWIN S.M., CHESWICK W.R., Firewalls et sécurité
Internet, Addison-Wesley, Paris, 1994.
[BOI 68] BOISSONNADE M., HALBIQUE, A.M., Statistique et
probabilités, Ligel, Paris, 1968.
[BUC 98] BUCHMANN J., "La factorisation des grands nombres", Pour la
science, n°251, Paris, available at: https://www.apprendre-en-
ligne.net/crypto/rsa/251_088_096.pdf, 1998.
[COC 19] COCHARD G.-M., Introduction to Stochastic Processes and
Simulation, ISTE Ltd, London and John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2019.
[CON 68] CONDAMINE M., VISSIO P., Mathématique 1ère C et E,
Delagrave, Paris, 1968.
[ENG 76] ENGEL A., Processus aléatoires pour les débutants, Cassini,
Paris, 1976.
[EXE 59] EXENER R., Logic in Elementary Mathematics, McGraw Hill,
New York, 1959.
[FAU 73] FAURE R., LEMAIRE B., Mathématiques pour l'informatique,
Gauthier Villars, Paris, 1973.
[FAU 79] FAURE R., Précis de recherche opérationnelle, Dunod/Bordas,
Paris, 1979.
[GHE 08] GHERNAOUTI-HELIE S., Sécurité informatique, Dunod, Paris,
2008.
[GOM 13] GOMEZ J., Codage et cryptographie, Le monde est
mathématique, Barcelona, 2013.

[GRA 78] GRANIER C., GUILBAUD B., Statistique dans l'entreprise,
Foucher, Paris 1978.
[HUR 79] HURE F., Traité expérimental de logique digitale, Editions
Techniques et Scientifiques Françaises, Paris, 1979.
[INA 99] INA, Réseaux et protection numérique des documents, Etudes
INA, Paris, 1999.
[LAH 95] LAHECHE K., Les codes en informatique : codes détecteurs et
correcteurs d'erreurs, Hermès, Paris, 1995.
[LEH 19] LEHNING H., La bible des codes secrets, Flammarion, Paris,
2019.
[LIP 83] LIPSCHUTZ S., Mathématiques pour informaticiens, Schaum -
McGraw Hill, Paris, 1983.
[LOV 91] LOVINFOSSE J.-P., Le piratage informatique, Marabout, Paris,
1991.
[MAC 87] MACCHI C., GUIBERT J.-F., Téléinformatique, Dunod, Paris,
1987.
[MAS 76] MASIERI W., Notions essentielles de statistique et calcul des
probabilités, Sirey, Paris, 1976.
[MEN 64] MENDELSON E., Introduction to Mathematical Logic,
International Student Editions, New York, 1964.
[MUL 18] MULLER D., Les courbes elliptiques, available at:
https://www.apprendre-en-ligne.net/crypto/moderne/elliptique.html,
2018.
[PHE 77] PHELIZON J.-F., Informatique opérationnelle, tome II, modèles
conduisant à la simulation, Economica, Paris, 1977.
[POC 71] POCHARD H., Nombres réels, nombres complexes, probabilités,
calcul différentiel, calcul intégral, terminales C, D, E, Gauthiers-Villars,
Paris, 1971.

[PRA 23] PRADEAU Y., La guerre des nombres premiers, Flammarion,
Paris, 2023.
[QUI 84] QUINE W.V.O., Méthodes de logique, Armand Colin, Paris, 1984.
[SIN 99] SINGH S., Histoire des codes secrets, Le livre de poche, Paris,
1999.
[VEL 19] VELU J., Méthodes mathématiques pour l'informatique, Dunod,
Paris, 2019.
[WOO 80] WOOLARD B., Conquérir la logique, Dunod, Paris, 1980.
OceanofPDF.com

List of Authors
Gérard-Michel COCHARD
Eco-PRocédés Optimisation et Aide
à la Décision (EPROAD, EA 4669)
Université de Picardie Jules Verne
Amiens
France
Mhand HIFI
Eco-PRocédés Optimisation et Aide
à la Décision (EPROAD, EA 4669)
Université de Picardie Jules Verne
Amiens
France
OceanofPDF.com

Index
A, B
AND gate, 88
antisymmetry, 36, 106
application, 42
arithmetic average, 235
arrangement, 49
associativity, 29, 69
Bernouilli’s law, 279
Bezout’s
corollary, 129
theorem, 128
biconditional, 10
Bienaymé-Chebyshev inequality, 306
bijection, 43
binary relationship, 33
binomial
coefficient, 51
law, 290, 317
block codes, 134
Boolean
algebra, 68
function, 73

C, D
Caesar’s code, 147
cardinal, 47
Cartesian product, 31
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, 252
centered coordinates, 250
central limit theorem, 303
characteristic function, 45
coefficient of variation, 242
combination, 50
commutativity, 69
complementarity, 29, 69
complementary, 28
complete logic set, 91
conclusion, 1
conditional, 8
probability, 191
congruence, 116
conjunction, 6
conjunctive inference, 16
contradiction, 11
convolutional codes, 134, 142
covariance, 269
cumulative polygon, 224
deductive reasoning, 14
DES, 160

DIL package, 95
diode, 94
disjunction, 7
distribution function, 287
distributivity, 29, 69
E, F
echoplex mode, 133
elliptic curve(s), 121, 168
empty set, 26
equiprobability, 187
equivalence relationship, 38
ergodic, 206
error
packet, 132
rate, 131
Euclid’s algorithm, 112
Euclidean division, 104
existential quantifier, 18
exponential law, 294
Fermat’s
little theorem, 117
test, 119
fixed point, 206
formal logic, 2

G, H
Gauss’ theorem, 130
GCD, 70, 111, 114, 127, 130
general trend, 254, 257
generating matrix, 137
Gini index, 243
half-adder, 100
Hamming distance, 135
Hasse diagram, 62
hypothetical syllogism, 16
I, K
idempotence, 29, 69
identifiable characters, 214
identity, 69
independence of two events, 194
inference
by case, 16
rules, 14
injection, 43
intercentile range, 239
interquartile range, 238
involution, 29, 69
Karnaugh tables, 84, 98
Koenig’s theorem, 241

L, M
largest element, 65
LCM, 70, 111, 114, 130
linear
adjustment, 248
code, 136
correlation coefficient, 269
Lorenz curve, 242
lower bound, 63, 65
Lucifer method, 158
M/M/1 system, 321
marginal distributions, 219
Markov chain, 199
maximal element, 64
maxterm, 79
mean deviation, 239
measurable characters, 214
median, 230
Mersenne numbers, 111
message signing, 166
minimal element, 64
minterm, 77
mode, 229
modulo division, 116

modus
ponens, 16
tollens, 16
Morgan’s laws, 69
MOS family, 95
N, O
NAND gate, 89
negation, 5
Newton’s binomial, 51
NOR gate, 90
normal law, 298, 318, 334
NOT gate, 87
null element, 65
OR gate, 88
order relation, 40
P, Q
parity
bit, 139
check, 138
particular and
affirmative, 3
negative, 3
Pascal’s triangle, 51
Poisson’s law, 293, 317

polygon of sizes, 220
polynomial codes, 140
predicate, 17
premises, 1
prenex form, 21
prime numbers, 106–108
private key, 159
probability
density, 280
law, 274
public key, 159
pure form, 21
quantum
computer, 170
cryptography, 170
R, S
random
numbers, 313
variable, 273
reflexivity, 35, 106, 116
regression lines, 266
regular transition matrix, 206
replacement rule, 14
RSA, 165
rules of reasoning, 3

seasonal
coefficient, 260
movement, 254
sieve of Eratosthenes, 108
smallest element, 65
standard deviation, 240, 284
Stirling’s formula, 54
Stone’s theorem, 70
substitution
method, 147
principle, 14
surjection, 43
syllogism, 1
symmetry, 36, 116
systematic codes, 134
T, U, V, W, X
tautology, 11
transistivity, 37, 106, 116
transistor, 94
transition
matrix, 201
probabilities, 195
transposition method, 147
truth value, 2
TTL family, 95

uniform law, 289
union, 28
universal
and affirmative, 3
and negative, 3
element, 65
quantifier, 17
upper bound, 63, 65
variance, 240, 283
Vigenère code, 154
VLSI technology, 95
weak law of large numbers, 190, 305, 307
XOR gate, 89
OceanofPDF.com

Wiley End User License Agreement
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.
OceanofPDF.com

