The Recursive Mind


The Recursive Mind
The Origins of Human Language,  
Thought, and Civilization
Michael C. Corballis
P R I N C E TO N  U N I V E R S I T Y  P R E S S   
P R I N C E TO N  A N D  OX F O R D

Copyright © 2011 by Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, 
Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 6 Oxford Street, 
Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1TW
press.princeton.edu 
All Rights Reserved
Third printing, and first paperback printing, with a new foreword by the author, 2014
Paperback ISBN 978-0-691-16094-8
The Library of Congress has cataloged the cloth edition of this book as follows
Corballis, Michael C.
  The recursive mind : the origins of human language, thought, and civilization /  
Michael C. Corballis.
    p.  cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-0-691-14547-1 (cloth : alk. paper) 
1. Evolutionary psychology.  2. Human evolution. 
3. Brain—Evolution.  4. Language and languages—Origin.  I. Title. 
  BF701.C665 2011
  155.7—dc22    2010043084
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Sabon LT Std text with Scala Sans OT Condensed display
Printed on acid-free paper 
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3

Contents
Foreword to the Paperback Edition
vii
Preface
xi
Chapter 1	
What Is Recursion?
1
PART 1	
Language
17
Chapter 2	
Language and Recursion
19
Chapter 3	
Do Animals Have Language?
36
Chapter 4	
How Language Evolved from Hand to Mouth
55
PART 2	
Mental Time Travel
81
Chapter 5	
Reliving the Past
83
Chapter 6	
About Time
100
Chapter 7	
The Grammar of Time
112
PART 3	
Theory of Mind
129
Chapter 8	
Mind Reading
131
Chapter 9	
Language and Mind
151
PART 4	
Human Evolution
167
Chapter 10	 The Recurring Question
169
Chapter 11	 Becoming Human
181
Chapter 12	 Becoming Modern
208
Chapter 13	 Final Thoughts
221
Notes
227
References
253
Index
281


Foreword to the Paperback Edition
The rather biblical notion that we humans were miraculously 
gifted language seems to persist unabated. In a recent popular and 
engaging book, published in 2012, the distinguished paleoanthro-
pologist Ian Tattersall wrote as follows:
Our ancestors made an almost unimaginable transition from a 
non-symbolic, nonlinguistic way of processing information and com-
municating information about the world to the symbolic and linguistic 
condition we enjoy today. It is a qualitative leap in cognitive state 
unparalleled in history. Indeed, as I’ve said, the only reason we have 
for believing that such a leap could ever have been made, is that it was 
made. And it seems to have been made well after the acquisition by our 
species of its distinctive modern form.1
How lucky we were, you might think, to receive this blessing. 
Without it, you wouldn’t be reading this book.
In the first edition of this book, I tried to broaden the discus-
sion as to what makes us human by arguing that recursion, often 
considered the critical component of language that distinguishes it 
from communication in other species, applies not only to language, 
but to other aspects of human thought. These include the recursive 
ability to insert the thoughts of others in our own thoughts and to 
insert past or future experiences into current experience, otherwise 
known as mental time travel. These considerations led me to sup-
pose that recursive thinking, and indeed language itself, probably 
evolved gradually over the past six million years or so of hominin 
evolution, and that some elements of recursive thinking may even 
be present in great apes. In short, we don’t need to appeal to sud-
den miracles.
The problem with attempts to explain the human condition, 
though, is that the evidence keeps nibbling away at one’s hard-won 
conclusions. In my case, as I perhaps should have anticipated, the 
nibbling was done by rats. For some years, Thomas Suddendorf 
and I had argued that mental time travel was unique to humans— 

viii   FOREWORD TO THE PAPERBACK EDITION
a conclusion extending earlier claims by the psychologist Endel 
Tulving that episodic memory was unique to our species. As I re-
count in the book, the brain structure that appears to be critical 
to mental time travel is the hippocampus. When people remember 
past events or imagine future ones, the hippocampus is activated, 
and destruction of the hippocampus leaves its victim effectively 
stuck in the present. This was well documented by Deborah Wear-
ing’s 2005 book, Forever Today, the account of her husband Clive 
Wearing’s time-shrinking plight after a virus attacked his hip-
pocampus.2 The same theme appears in Suzanne Corkin’s 2013 
book, Permanent Present Tense, on the late Henry Molaison, more 
famously known as H.M., whose hippocampus was destroyed by a 
brain operation.3 The titles of these books tell their stories.
But other mammals, and even birds, have hippocampi. It has 
long been known that the hippocampus of the rat contains cells 
that respond when a rat is in a particular location in some en-
vironment, such as a maze. These cells are known as place cells. 
It transpires that these cells fire in sharp-wave ripples when the 
rat is removed from that environment, and that the sequence of 
firing effectively maps out a trajectory in the environment. Some-
times the trajectory is one the animal had previously traversed, but 
sometimes it is the reverse of that trajectory, and sometimes it is 
a trajectory unrelated to one actually traversed. It seems that the 
rat is mentally reliving a past experience, or imagining a future 
one, or perhaps even indulging in a peripatetic fantasy. Early in 
2013, I wrote a short paper suggesting that rats could travel men-
tally in time, embedding past and perhaps future episodes into the  
present.4
I have little doubt that our own mental time travels are more 
complex and more interesting. Moreover, we can talk about our 
mental time travels; indeed, I suggest in the book that language 
evolved precisely to enable us to communicate about the nonpre-
sent—events that do not take place in the here and now. Rats, on 
the other hand, can’t talk, and must therefore keep their mental 
time travels to themselves. To find out about them, neuroscien-
tists had to insert electrodes into their hippocampi. The results re-
mind us that we should always be wary of assertions about human 

FOREWORD TO THE PAPERBACK EDITION   ix
uniqueness. The origins of mental time travel may go back much 
further in evolution than I suggest in the book. So far, that is my 
only reservation, but it pays always to watch out for rat nibblings.
Notes 
1. Tattersall, I. 2012, 199.
2. Wearing 2005.
3. Corkin 2013.
4. Corballis 2013.
Additional references
Corballis, M.C. 2013. Mental time travel: A case for evolutionary continuity. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17, 5–6.
Corkin, S. 2013. Permanent present tense. New York: Basic Books.
Tattersall, I. 2012. Masters of the planet: The search for human origins. New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan.


Preface
We humans like to think that we have capacities that make us 
not only distinct from all other creatures on the planet, but also 
superior to them. What other species, you might ask, has measured 
the speed of light, figured out how the universe began, invented 
the laptop computer, or painted a portrait? Our species has even 
succeeded in escaping from the planet altogether, even if only fleet-
ingly. You might also ask, I suppose, why any other species would 
care to do these things, and we do need to be wary of our comfort-
able assumption that we are at the top of the earthly hierarchy, 
since it provides a too-easy justification of the appalling way we 
treat other animals. Let’s face it: We eat them, kill them for sport, 
drink their milk, wear their skins, ride on their backs, ridicule them, 
house them in zoos, and breed them to our own specifications.
By the same token, though, it cannot be denied that our species 
has dominated the earth like no other. Not only do we subjugate 
other creatures to our needs and whims, but we also mold the 
physical environment to our specifications, to the point that our 
success may prove to be our undoing. Unless we make better use of 
our vaunted intelligence, we run the risk of succumbing to pollution, 
global warming, or weapons of mass destruction—or, to think 
recursively, of weapons for the mass destruction of weapons of mass 
destruction. And yet we are biologically almost indistinguishable 
from the other great apes, and share a common ancestor with 
the chimpanzee and bonobo dating from only about six or seven 
million years ago—a mere eye-blink in evolutionary time. In marked  
contrast to human triumphalism, the great apes have been forced 
into ever-diminishing habitats, and they too are threatened with 
extinction. 
Many have conjectured about why our species is so dominant 
on the planet. Assuredly, the reason is mental rather than physi-
cal—any number of animals out there can easily beat us in physi-
cal combat. Descartes argued that only humans are capable of free 
will. Aristotle suggested that man is the only political animal, and 

history suggests that he should have included women. Thomas 
Willis thought that only humans were capable of laughter, while 
Martin Luther argued that it was the possession of property that 
distinguished us. Benjamin Franklin attributed human uniqueness 
to tool-making, and the Greek philosopher Anaxagoras said it was 
the human hand that made us the wisest of species. Steven Mithen 
recently suggested that music may have started it all. Some years 
ago, in my book The Lopsided Ape, I argued that the asymmetry of 
the human brain was what made us what we are. There is probably  
some truth to at least some of these assertions, but readers may ob-
serve that lopsidedness receives very little mention in this book. 
The one characteristic that has received most attention is lan-
guage. “In the beginning,” said St. John, “was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God” (John 1:1). In the 
seventeenth century, René Descartes argued that language, as an 
expression of free will, was so unconstrained that it could not be 
explained in terms of mechanical principles, and must therefore 
have been a gift from God. In the following century, another French 
philosopher, Abbé Étienne Bonnot de Condillac, speculated about 
how language evolved, but as an ordained priest he was fearful 
of offending the church, and disguised his theory in the form of a 
fable—as we shall see in chapter 4. In 1866, the Linguistic Society 
of Paris banned all discussion of the origins of language.
In the twentieth century the linguist Noam Chomsky, himself 
a self-styled Cartesian, also argued that language could not have 
evolved through natural selection. His reasoning was based not on 
religion, but rather on a view of how language works. Basically, 
he argued that external language, as spoken or signed, must have 
arisen from an internal language—essentially the “language of 
thought”—that has no direct reference to the outside world, and 
so could not have been subjected to the pressures of adaptation to 
the environment. Chomsky therefore argued that internal language 
emerged from some single and singular event causing a rewiring, 
perhaps a fortuitous mutation, of the brain. He argued further that 
this event occurred late in the evolution of our species, perhaps 
even within the past 100,000 years. This account, although not 
driven by religious doctrine, does smack of the miraculous.
xii   PREFACE

Chomsky is nevertheless one of the heroes of this book. He has 
long recognized the open-ended nature of language, and suggested 
that the key to this open-endedness is recursion. By applying prin-
ciples in recursive fashion, we can create utterances, whether spo-
ken or signed, of essentially infinite variability. Where I part from 
Chomsky, though, is in his view that thought itself is fundamentally 
linguistic. I argue instead that the modes of thought that made lan-
guage possible were nonlinguistic, but were nonetheless possessed 
of recursive properties to which language adapted. Where Chom-
sky views thought through the lens of language, I prefer to view 
language through the lens of thought. This change of view pro-
vides the main stimulus for this book, since it not only leads to a  
better understanding of how we humans think, but it also leads to 
a radically different perspective on language itself, as well as on 
how it evolved. 
I focus on two modes of thought that are recursive, and prob-
ably distinctively human. One is mental time travel, the ability to 
call past episodes to mind and also to imagine future episodes. 
This can be a recursive operation in that imagined episodes can 
be inserted into present consciousness, and imagined episodes can 
even be inserted into other imagined episodes. Mental time travel 
also blends into fiction, whereby we imagine events that have never 
occurred, or are not necessarily planned for the future. Imagined 
events can have all of the complexity and variability of language 
itself. Indeed I suggest that language emerged precisely to convey 
this complexity, so that we can share our memories, plans, and 
fictions. 
The second aspect of thought is what has been called theory of 
mind, the ability to understand what is going on in the minds of 
others. This too is recursive. I may know not only what you are 
thinking, but I may also know that you know what I am thinking. 
As we shall see, most language, at least in the form of conversation, 
is utterly dependent on this capacity. No conversation is possible 
unless the participants share a common mind-set. Indeed, most 
conversation is fairly minimal, since the thread of conversation 
is largely assumed. I heard a student coming out of a lecture say-
ing to her friend, “That was really cool.” She assumed, probably  
PREFACE   xiii

rightly, that her friend knew exactly what “that” was, and what 
she meant by “cool.”
That, then, is the theme of the book, but there are many ex-
cursions—into such questions as whether animals have language, 
whether human language evolved from manual gestures, whether 
all languages share common principles, why fiction is adaptive. 
Given the view that human thought and language evolved gradu-
ally, I sketch the likely evolution of our distinctive characteristics 
over the past 6 million or so years, and not, as Chomsky would 
have it, over the past 100,000 years. And if you don’t understand 
what recursion is, I hope this book will give you a better idea. 
Many people have inspired my thinking scientifically and philo-
sophically, and of course many of them, perhaps most of them, will 
disagree with at least some of my conclusions. They include Donna 
Rose Addis, John Andreae, Michael Arbib, Giovanni Berlucchi, 
Brian Boyd, Noam Chomsky, Nicola Clayton, Erica Cosentino, 
Karen Emmorey, Nicholas Evans, Francesco Ferretti, Tecumseh 
Fitch, Maurizio Gentilucci, Russell Gray, Nicholas Humphrey, Jim  
Hurford, Steven Pinker, Giacomo Rizzolatti, Michael Studdert-
Kennedy, Thomas Suddendorf, Endel Tulving, and Faraneh Vargha-
Khadem. I especially thank my wife, Barbara, for putting up with 
the hours I spent over the computer; at least she had her golf. My 
sons Tim and Paul—the latter claimed to a friend that he taught 
me everything I know—have often corrected me on points of psy-
chology and philosophy. 
I also owe a special debt of thanks to Eric Schwartz, Beth Clev-
enger, Richard Isomaki, and Jeffrey Weiss of Princeton University 
Press, and to my agent Peter Tallack, for their invaluable help in 
putting some shape into the book.
xiv   PREFACE

The Recursive Mind


1
What Is Recursion?
In 1637, the French philosopher R né Descartes wrote the immor-
tal line “Je pense, donc je suis.” Curiously, this is usually rendered 
in Latin, as Cogito, ergo sum, and is translated in English as “I 
think, therefore I am.” In making this statement, Descartes was not 
merely thinking, he was thinking about thinking, which led him to 
the conclusion that he existed. The recursive nature of Descartes’s 
insight is perhaps better rendered in the version offered by Am-
brose Bierce in The Devil’s Dictionary: Cogito cogito ergo cogito 
sum—“I think I think, therefore I think I am.” Descartes himself, 
though, was more prone to doubt, and expanded his dictum as “Je 
doute, donc je pense, donc je suis”—“I doubt, therefore I think, 
therefore I am.” He thus concluded that even if he doubted, some-
one or something must be doing the doubting, so the very fact that 
he doubted proved his existence. This probably came as a relief to 
his friends.
In this book, I examine the more general role of recursion in 
our mental lives, and argue that it is the primary characteristic 
that distinguishes the human mind from that of other animals. It 
underlies our ability not only to reflect upon our own minds, but 
also to simulate the minds of others. It allows us to travel mentally 
in time, inserting consciousness of the past or future into present 
consciousness. Recursion is also the main ingredient distinguishing 
human language from all other forms of animal communication. 
Recursion, though, is a fairly elusive concept, often used in 
slightly different ways.1 Before I delve into some of the complexi-
ties, let’s consider some further examples to give the general idea. 
First, then, a not-too-serious dictionary definition: 
Recursion (rĭ-kûr’-zhən) noun. See recursion.
One problem here, of course, is that this implies an infinite loop, 
e

2   chapter 1
from which you may never escape in order to read the other stuff 
in this book. The following variant suggests a way out:
Recursion (rĭ-kûr’-zhən) noun. If you still don’t get it,  
see recursion.
This banks on the possibility that if you do get it after a round or 
two, you can escape and move on. If you don’t, well I’m sorry.
The postmodern novelist John Barth concocted what is probably 
both the shortest and the longest story ever written, called Frame-
Tale. It can be reproduced as follows: Write the sentence ONCE 
UPON A TIME THERE on one side of a strip of paper, and WAS 
A STORY THAT BEGAN on the other side. Then twist one end 
once and attach it to the other end, to form a Mobius strip. As you 
work your way round the strip, the story goes on forever. 
A similar example comes from an anonymous parody of the first 
line of Bulwer-Lytton’s infamous novel, Paul Clifford:
It was a dark and stormy night, and we said to the captain, “Tell us 
a story!” And this is the story the captain told: “It was a dark and 
stormy night, and we said to the captain, ‘Tell us a story!’ And this is 
the story the captain told: ‘It was a dark . . .’ ”
Another amusing example is provided by a competition, run by  
The Spectator magazine, which asked readers to state what they 
Figure 1. The thinker thinks of  
thinking of thinking (author’s 
drawing).

What Is Recursion?   3
would most like to read on opening the morning paper. The win-
ning entry read as follows:
Our Second Competition
The First Prize in the second of this year’s competitions goes to Mr 
Arthur Robinson, whose witty entry was easily the best of those we 
received. His choice of what he would like to read when opening the 
paper was headed, “Our Second Competition,” and was as follows: 
“The First prize in the second of this year’s competitions goes to Mr 
Arthur Robinson, whose witty entry was easily the best of those we 
received. His choice of what he would like to read when opening the 
paper was headed ‘Our Second Competition,’ but owing to paper re-
strictions we cannot print all of it.”2 
Taking a different tack, John Barth’s story Autobiography: A 
Self-recorded Fiction is a recursive tale in which the narrator is 
ostensibly the story itself, writing about itself.3 It ends, recursively, 
in its own end:
Nonsense, I’ll mutter to the end, one word after another, string the 
rascals out, mad or not, heard or not, my last words will be my last 
words.
To my knowledge, no story has yet attempted to write a story of a 
story that writes about itself.
And then there is the recurring problem of fleas, as penned by 
the Victorian mathematician Augustus de Morgan:
Great fleas have little fleas upon their backs to bite ’em,
And little fleas have smaller fleas, and so ad infinitum.
And the great fleas themselves, in turn, have greater fleas to go on,
While these again have greater still, and greater still, and so on.4
This notion of inserting progressively smaller entities into larger 
ones ad infinitum can also give rise to interesting visual effects, as 
in the examples shown in figure 2.

4   chapter 1
The use of recursion to create infinite sequences is also exploited 
by mathematics. One such sequence is the set of natural (i.e. whole) 
numbers, which I’ll write as N. Thus we can generate all of the 
positive natural numbers by the definitions
1 is in N
If n is in N then (n + 1) is in N.
This second definition is recursive, because N appears in the condi-
tion that needs to be satisfied for N.
You may remember, possibly from schooldays, what factorials 
are. As a schoolboy I found them amusing in a childish kind of 
way, because they were signaled with exclamation marks; thus fac-
torial 3, usually written 3!, is 3 * 2 * 1, and equals 6.5 Similarly, we 
can compute the following:
5! = 5 * 4 * 3 * 2 * 1 = 120
8! = 8 * 7 * 6 * 5 * 4 * 3 * 2 * 1 = 40,320
Apollonian gasket 
Sierpinski triangle
Figure 2. Two figures showing recursive insertions of circles (left) and triangles 
(right). The Apollonian gasket derives from Apollonius, a Greek geometer  
from the third century BC, who studied the problem of how to draw a circle 
that is tangential to three circles. Starting with three circles that are tangential 
to one another, one can continue the process of constructing circles tangential to 
all triplets ad infinitum. The resulting figure serves as a mathematical model for 
foam (see Mackenzie 2009 for more information). (2D Apollonian gasket with 
four initial circles courtesy of Guillaume Jacquenot.)

What Is Recursion?   5
Clearly, this can go on forever, but we can capture the entire set by 
using just two defining equations:
0! = 1
n! = n * (n − 1)!  [where n > 0].
This second equation is recursive in that a factorial is defined in terms 
of a factorial. We need the first equation to kick the thing off.
The next example is for rabbits, and is called the Fibonacci se-
ries, defined by the following three equations:
fibonacci(0) = 1
fibonacci(1) = 1
fibonacci(n) = fibonacci(n − 1) + fibonacci (n − 2)   
[where n > 1].
If you are following me, you should be able to compute the series, 
which goes 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, . . . What the definition says, then, is 
that each number in the series is the sum of the two previous ones. 
Why rabbits? Fibonacci (c. 1170–1250) was an Italian mathemati-
cian who used the series to predict the growth of a hypothetical 
population of rabbits.6
For a final informal example, I take you to Kyoto, Japan, where 
I once happened upon a sign on a gate that was written in Kanji 
script. I asked what it meant, and my guide told me, I hope correctly, 
that it meant Post no bills. There is a paradox here in that the sign 
was itself a bill, thereby contravening its own presence. Perhaps 
there needed to be another sign that said Post no “Post no bills” 
bills. But of course this is itself in violation of its own message, so 
we might envisage another sign that reads Post no ‘Post “Post no 
bills” bills’ bills. There is no end to this process, so it might have 
been more sensible to have allowed bills on the gate in the first 
place. In practice, though, limitations of time, space, or memory  
will prevent a recursive sequence of structure continuing forever.
Toward a Working Definition
One of the characteristics of recursion, then, is that it can takes 
its own output as the next input, a loop that can be extended  

6   chapter 1
indefinitely to create sequences or structures of unbounded length 
or complexity. In practice, of course, we do not get caught up in 
infinite loops—life is simply too short for that. For the purposes of 
this book, then, we shall not be interested so much in the genera-
tion of infinite sequences as in a definition that might apply use-
fully to human thought. A definition that meets this requirement 
is suggested by Steven Pinker and Ray Jackendoff, who define re-
cursion as “a procedure that calls itself, or . . . a constituent that 
contains a constituent of the same kind.”7 
The second part of this definition is important, especially in lan-
guage, because it allows that recursive constructions need not in-
volve the embedding of the same constituents, as in the example 
of the gate in Kyoto, but may contain constituents of the same 
kind—a process sometimes known as “self-similar embedding.” 
For example, noun phrases can be built from noun phrases in re-
cursive fashion. Tecumseh Fitch gives the example of simple noun 
phrases such as the dog, the cat, the tree, the lake, and one can then 
create new noun phrases by placing the word beside between any 
pair: the dog beside the tree, the cat beside the lake.8 Or one might 
have two sentences: Jane loves John and Jane flies airplanes, and 
embed one in the other (with appropriate modification) as Jane, 
who flies airplanes, loves John. These can be extended recursively 
to whatever level of complexity is desired. For example we could 
extend the noun phrase to the dog beside the tree beside the lake, 
or the sentence about Jane and John to Jane who flies airplanes 
that exceed the sound barrier loves John, who is prone to self-
doubt. Most languages make use of recursive operations of this 
sort—although we shall see in the next chapter that there may be 
a few languages that don’t operate in this way.
Although it is common to provide illustrations from language, 
the main theme of this book is that it is in thought rather than in 
language that recursion originates. As Pinker and Jackendoff put 
it, “The only reason language needs to be recursive is because its 
function is to express recursive thoughts. If there were not any 
recursive thoughts, the means of expression would not need recur-
sion either.”9 In remembering episodes from the past, for instance, 
we essentially insert sequences of past consciousness into present 

What Is Recursion?   7
consciousness, or in our interactions with other people we may 
insert what they are thinking into our own thinking. These themes 
are explored in later chapters.
Process and Structure
As suggested by Pinker and Jackendoff’s dual definition, recursion 
can be understood either as a process or as a structure. The distinc-
tion can be important. A recursive process may lead to a structure 
that need not be seen as itself recursive. For example, suppose we 
construct a sequence of musical notes with an embedding routine 
by pairing pairs of notes, each consisting of a randomly chosen 
note played on a piano with a randomly chosen note played on a 
violin. The first pair is embedded in another pair, and the four-note 
output then embedded in another pair. This process can be contin-
ued indefinitely to create a sequence of notes. As illustrated in fig-
ure 3, though, the sequence can be interpreted, not as a recursively 
embedded structure, but as a sequence of piano notes followed by 
an equally long sequence of violin notes. This failure to distinguish 
recursive embedding from recursive structure has led to some con-
fusion, especially in claims about recursion in nonhuman species.10
Again, in his most recent theory on the nature of language, 
known as the Minimalist Program,11 Noam Chomsky has argued 
that human thought is generated by a Merge operation, applied re-
cursively. That is, units are merged to form larger entities, and the 
merged entities can be themselves merged to form still larger enti-
ties, and so on. This operation underlies the embedded structure of 
human language, although in Chomsky’s theory it applies strictly 
to what he calls I-language, which is the thought process preced-
ing E-language, the external language that is actually spoken or 
signed. Merge can produce strings of elements, be they words or 
elements of thought, and although it may be applied recursively to 
produce hierarchical structure, that structure may not be evident 
in the final output. For instance, even sentences might be regarded 
simply as words all merged in unstructured sequence, as in ritual-
ized songs or prayers. Everyday language, too, may include men-
tally undifferentiated clichés and slogans, or sequences that are 

8   chapter 1
highly automated. Politicians may be especially prone to this kind 
of talk.
As noted above, recursive processes and structures can in prin-
ciple extend without limit, but are limited in practice. Nevertheless 
recursion does give rise to the concept of infinity, itself perhaps 
limited to the human imagination. After all, only humans have 
acquired the ability to count indefinitely, and to understand the 
nature of infinite series, whereas other species can at best merely 
estimate quantity, and are accurate only up to some small finite 
number.12 Even in language, we understand that a sentence can in 
principle be extended indefinitely, even though in practice it cannot 
be—although the novelist Henry James had a damn good try. Such 
understandings are indeed part of human mental achievement, and 
depend on a human capacity for recursive thought. Nevertheless 
they are not the primary concerns of this book.
The appealing aspect of recursion is precisely that it can in 
principle extend indefinitely to create thoughts (and sentences) 
of whatever complexity is required. The idea has an elegant sim-
plicity, giving rise to what Chomsky called “discrete infinity,”13 or 
Wilhelm Humboldt (1767–1835) famously called “the infinite use 
of finite means.” And although recursion is limited in practice, we 
can nevertheless achieve considerable depths of recursive thought, 
arguably unsurpassed in any other species. In chess, for example, a 
player may be able to think recursively three or four steps ahead, 
P
P
P
P
V
V
V
V
P
P
P
P
V
V
V
V
Figure 3. The sequence of Ps and Vs can be created either by recursively nest-
ing PV pairs in PV pairs (left), or by arranging a sequence of Ps followed by a 
sequence of an equal number of Vs (right). The sequence might be generated as 
in the left panel, but interpreted as in the right panel.

What Is Recursion?   9
examining possible moves and countermoves, but the number of 
possibilities soon multiplies beyond the capacity of the mind to hold  
them. 
Deeper levels of recursion may be possible with the aid of writ-
ing, or simply with extended time for rehearsal and contemplation, 
or extended memory capacity through artificial means. The slow 
development of a complex mathematical proof, for example, may 
require subtheorems within subtheorems. Plays or novels may in-
volve recursive loops that build slowly—in Shakespeare’s Twelfth 
Night, for example, Maria foresees that Sir Toby will eagerly an-
ticipate that Olivia will judge Malvolio absurdly impertinent to 
suppose that she wishes him to regard himself as her preferred 
suitor.14 As in fiction, so in life; we all live in a web of complex re-
cursive relationships, and planning a dinner party may need care-
ful attention to who thinks what of whom. 
The structures resulting from recursive processes need not reveal 
the nature of those processes, just as a loaf of bread may not reveal 
the processes of kneading that went into the making of the bread, 
or the taste of wine the picking and trampling of the grapes. Often, 
though, the structure of a sentence or stream of thought may reveal 
recursive embedding—interpretation of a sentence may require the 
understanding of phrases embedded in phrases, regardless of how 
the embedding was actually accomplished, and an internal under-
standing of a stream of thought may require the segmentation of 
episodes within episodes.
What Recursion Is Not
Recursion is not the only device for creating sequences or struc-
tures of potentially infinite length or size. I now consider some 
examples that do not meet the criteria for recursion. 
Repetition
Simple repetition can lead to sequences of potentially infinite 
length, but does not classify as true recursion. For example, the 
sentence that opens chapter 9 of A. A. Milne’s Winnie the Pooh 

10   chapter 1
goes It rained and it rained and it rained. This could go on for-
ever—or at least until Piglet is drowned—but the repetition simply 
conveys the information that it rained rather a lot, causing Pig-
let some ennui. It is not recursive because each addition of and it 
rained is not driven by the previous one; it is simply added at the 
discretion of the writer.
In any event, repetition does not distinguish human activity from 
that of nonhuman animals. Birdsong, for example, is relentlessly 
repetitive, but each repeated theme does not embellish or qualify 
the previous one. At most, the repetition might signal urgency, or 
simply signal continuing presence, as one might repeatedly knock 
on a door in the hope of arousing someone inside. Repetition is 
ubiquitous in human and animal life, in activities ranging from the 
repeated jaw movements in eating, to the curiously repetitive na-
ture of sexual activity. The spider, no less, is capable of repetition, 
as in Walt Whitman’s Leaves of Grass:15
A NOISELESS, patient spider
I mark’d, where, on a little promontory, it stood, isolated;
Mark’d how, to explore the vacant, vast surrounding,
It launch’d forth filament, filament, filament, out of itself;
Ever unreeling them—ever tirelessly speeding them
Information can also be aggregated in nonrecursive fashion, as 
when the short-story writer Saki (H. H. Munro) wrote, “Hunger, 
fatigue, and despairing hopelessness had numbed his brain.”16 Ag-
gregation of different phrases similarly compounds meaning ad-
ditively, as when the historian Peter Hennessy wrote:
The model of a modern Prime Minister would be a kind of grotesque 
composite freak—someone with the dedication to duty of a Peel, the 
physical energy of a Gladstone, the detachment of a Salisbury, the balls 
of a Lloyd George, the word-power of a Churchill, the administrative 
gifts of an Attlee, the style of a Macmillan, the managerialism of a 
Heath, and the sleep requirements of a Thatcher.17
The sentence itself has recursive elements, but the aggregation of 
phrases to describe the freakish composite is not recursive in that 
each does not call the next. Instead, they are effectively elements 

What Is Recursion?   11
in a list, inserted to add information. Nonhuman species may well 
have a similar ability to accumulate information, as when under-
standing a predator as large, fierce, and with sharp teeth and claws.
Iteration
A slightly more subtle variant on repetition and aggregation is it-
eration, where a process is repeated, but in this case there is input 
from the previous application of the process. In this respect it is 
like recursion, and indeed considered by mathematicians to belong 
to the class of “general recursive functions.” For the main purposes 
of this book, though, it does not qualify as true recursion because 
each output is discarded once it has been entered into the next ap-
plication. The dictionary definition of recursion that I gave earlier 
in this chapter was also really an example of iteration rather than 
recursion, because you just keep going round and round the loop, 
without any added structure. The iterations therefore do not lead 
to added complexity.18 
Iterative procedures are used in computational mathematics to 
arrive at increasingly accurate solutions to a problem. The basic 
idea is to start with a preliminary solution—perhaps a guess—and 
then use a procedure to compute a new solution. This solution is 
then used as the starting point for the next computation, and the 
new solution is then the starting point for the next round. The 
cycle is repeated until the solutions stabilize to some acceptable 
criterion.19 Feedback systems operate in much the same way, typi-
cally as a means of maintaining homeostasis. For example, a ther-
mostat may involve a system for raising or lowering temperature, 
and the goal is to achieve some given temperature. The actual tem-
perature is fed into the system, which operates to raise or lower 
the temperature until the desired is reached. The body is awash 
with feedback systems to maintain homeostasis of temperature, 
iron, energy, blood composition, and so on. The main regulator is 
the hypothalamus, in the limbic system of the brain. Such systems 
again do not differentiate humans from other animals.
Sometimes the distinction between recursion and iteration may 
be a matter of interpretation. In the infinite loop created by the 

12   chapter 1
parody of Paul Clifford, one might say that each beginning of the 
story is initiated by the previous one, which is then forgotten. The 
parody is best appreciated, though, if the story is seen as an endless, 
ever deepening whirlpool, with each segment remaining as part 
of it. I’m told the story works best if each segment is spoken with 
a different accent.
Consider too this line from a well-known children’s verse: 
This is the dog that worried the cat that killed the rat that ate the malt 
that lay in the house that Jack built.
To understand this sentence as truly recursive, one must appreciate 
that it describes a state of affairs as a complex whole, and refers 
to particular cases of a dog, cat, rat, malt, house, and fellow called 
Jack. It is not simply the stringing together of a dog that worried 
a cat, a cat that killed a rat, and so forth. A young child, though, 
might process it in this piecemeal way, as a succession of unrelated 
events. 
Recursion and Evolutionary Psychology
In emphasizing recursion as a unifying concept, the approach taken 
in this book contrasts with that adopted by so-called evolutionary 
psychologists, who have argued that the mind has multiple facets. 
The basic tenets of evolutionary psychology were laid out in the 
1992 volume The Adapted Mind, edited by Jerome Barkow, Leda 
Cosmides, and John Tooby, and popularized by Steven Pinker in 
his influential 1997 book How the Mind Works.20 Thus Pinker 
writes that the human mind “is not a single organ but a system of 
organs, which we can think of as psychological faculties or mental 
modules.”21 In examining present-day human behavior, the evolu-
tionary psychologist’s agenda is to discover independent processes 
as the basic modules, and relate them to conditions that prevailed 
in the Pleistocene, when humans existed primarily as hunter- 
gatherers. As Pinker puts it, the aim is to carve the mind at its 
joints, so to speak, and “reverse-engineer” its components, or mod-
ules, back to the epoch during which the human mind was formed.  

What Is Recursion?   13
In this view, the mind is really a collection of miniminds, each 
beavering away on its own specific problem, among which are lan-
guage and theory of mind. This has been called the Swiss-army-
knife model of the mind, with a blade for every purpose.22
The danger with this approach is that it becomes too easy to 
postulate modules and to tell “just so” stories about how they 
evolved, so that there is a risk of returning to the now-abandoned 
instinct psychology of the early twentieth century.23 Instinct psy-
chology perished under the sheer weight of numbers—the author 
of one text counted 1,594 instincts that had been attributed to 
animals and humans24—and evolutionary psychology may also 
drown in a sea of modules, if not of mixed metaphors. Pinker sug-
gests that we like potato chips because fatty foods were nutrition-
ally valuable during the Pleistocene, but scarce enough that there 
was no danger of obesity; we like landscapes with trees because 
trees provides shade and escape from dangerous carnivores on the 
Africa savanna; flowers please us because they are markers for 
edible fruits, nuts, or tubers amid the greenery of the savanna; 
and so on. “There are modules,” he writes, “for objects and forces, 
for animate beings, for minds, and for natural kinds like animals, 
plants, and minerals.”25
This is not to say that the Swiss-army-knife model is without 
merit. Some of the postulated modules do provide insight into the 
human condition, and are reasonably well founded. For example, 
foundational work in evolutionary psychology by Leda Cosmides 
provided good evidence for a “cheater-detection module”—an in-
stinctive ability to detect those who flout social conventions for 
their own gain.26 A recent study suggests that humans possess a 
“category-specific attention system” that is especially adapted for 
attending to animals;27 one of the authors, John Tooby, is quoted 
as saying, “Even dull animals like pigeons . . . recruit a surpris-
ing amount of attention—as do turtles resembling rocks.”28 This 
book is not intended to deny that there are many specific disposi-
tions that shape our mental and social lives; rather, my aim is to 
suggest that there are deeper aspects of human thought that are 
governed by similar principles, and that recursion is one of those 
principles—and perhaps the most important one.

To be fair, too, not all evolutionary psychologists have insisted 
that modules are completely encapsulated, shut off from any com-
munication with one another. Even Steven Pinker, for example, 
writes, “[Modules] accomplish specialized functions, thanks to 
their specialized structures, but don’t necessarily come in encap-
sulated packages.”29 Steven Mithen, although scarcely a card-
carrying evolutionary psychologist, argued that the human mind 
evolved its distinctive character precisely because previously en-
capsulated modules began to “leak,” creating what he calls “cogni-
tive fluidity.”30 It is as though the modules stopped minding their 
own businesses, and began to gossip. My approach in this book is 
not entirely at odds with this view, in that I argue a common prin-
ciple might underlie a number of our distinctive abilities.
Others are also beginning to question the Swiss-army-knife 
model of the human mind more starkly. David Premack, for ex-
ample, adopts an approach similar to that offered in this book. Re-
viewing the evidence for discontinuity between humans and other 
animals, he writes: “Animal competencies are mainly adaptations 
restricted to a single goal. Human competencies are domain-general  
and serve numerous goals.”31 This in effect reverses the evolution-
ary psychology argument—the mind has become less rather than 
more modular. The tide may well be turning. 
In any event it is unlikely that recursion can be considered a 
module. As we shall see, recursion seems to be an organizing prin­
ciple in very different spheres of human mental activity, from lan-
guage to memory to mind reading. Recursive thinking probably 
depends on other mental attributes. One of these is what has been 
termed working memory, which holds information in conscious-
ness. In order to embed processes within processes it is necessary 
to remember where one had got to in the earlier process when an 
embedded process has been completed. For instance, in a sentence 
like My dog, who eats bananas, often gets sick, one must hold 
the early part of the sentence (My dog) and link it to the next 
part (often gets sick). Dwight W. Read has argued that nonhuman 
primates, even our closest relatives the chimpanzees, have a work-
ing memory that is too limited to allow this kind of embedding.32 
Recursion probably also depends on an executive process that or-
14   chapter 1

What Is Recursion?   15
ganizes what is to be embedded in what, and this may depend on 
the frontal lobes of the brain. The ability to organize and carry out 
recursive operations may therefore depend on several processes.
Although I do not embrace the modular view assumed by evo-
lutionary psychologists, I am at one with them in proposing that 
a distinctively human mind evolved during the Pleistocene, the 
epoch that stretched from around 2.6 million years ago to some  
12,000 years ago. How that happened will be told in the later 
chapters of this book.
Plan of the Book
The book is divided into four parts. 
Part 1 deals with language. Although recursion is not limited to 
language, it is most commonly invoked to explain why human lan-
guage differs from other forms of animal communication, an in-
sight largely attributable to Noam Chomsky. Chapter 2 discusses 
the nature of language, with particular emphasis on the role of 
recursion. Chapter 3 then raises the age-old question of whether 
other animals have anything resembling human language. Chapter 
4 develops the idea that language evolved from manual gestures—
an idea that suggests greater evolutionary continuity between hu-
mans and other primates than the more common assumption that 
language emerged from vocal calls.
Part 2 deals with mental time travel, the ability to bring to mind 
events removed from the present in both time and place. Chapter 5 
starts with memory, and develops the idea that memory for specific 
episodes is unique to humans. Chapter 6 extends the notion of epi-
sodic memory to the imagining of possible future events, leading 
to the concept of the self as existing through time. This leads to 
the notion, discussed in chapter 7, that language itself evolved to 
enable people to share their memories and plans, and so to com-
municate about events that are not present in the immediate envi-
ronment. This leads also to fiction—the telling of stories that need 
not be based on fact, but that nonetheless hone the capacity to deal 
with the episodic exigencies of human social life.

16   chapter 1
Part 3 deals another recursive aspect of human thought, namely, 
theory of mind—or the ability to understand what others are think­
ing or feeling. Chapter 8 introduces mind-reading, not as a psychic 
phenomenon, but as a natural ability to infer the mental perspec-
tives of other people. This ability is again critical to social cohesion 
and cooperation. Chapter 9 explains how theory of mind was also 
critical to the emergence of language.
Part 4 delves more specifically into the question of how the re-
cursive mind evolved. Chapter 10 sets this question in the context 
of the classic debate between Cartesian discontinuity and Darwin-
ian continuity. Chapter 11 examines some of the steps by which 
the hominins,33 after splitting from the line leading to modern 
chimpanzees and bonobos, began to assume human-like attri-
butes. Chapter 12 then considers the final step to “modern” Homo 
sapiens, the sole surviving hominin species—dominant, manipula-
tive, Machiavellian, and capable of pondering our own nature and 
status on the planet. That, perhaps, is the ultimate triumph of the 
recursive mind.
Chapter 13 presents the final summary and conclusions.

Part 1
Language
Language takes pride of place because it is often considered the 
one faculty that makes humans unique, although we shall consider  
other candidates in later chapters. In the Chomskyan view of lan-
guage, moreover, recursion is seen as its most distinguishing feature.  
As we shall see in the following three chapters, though, this view is 
undergoing some revision, and there may even be some languages  
that do not make use of recursive principles. Moreover, closer scru-
tiny of animal communication suggests greater continuity than a 
strict Chomskyan or Cartesian perspective might imply. The notion 
of continuity is buttressed by the argument that language evolved 
from manual gestures rather than from vocal calls, as I explain in 
chapter 3. 
Even so, language remains vastly more complex than any form 
of animal communication, and understanding how it evolved, it 
has been suggested, might be “the hardest problem in science.”1 
Language may not always draw on recursive principles, but a main 
theme of this book is that it nevertheless depends on the recursive 
nature of nonlinguistic thought. In this view, language is a central 
ingredient of human thought as an adaptation to social modes of 
thinking that had evolved independently. This theme is elaborated 
in parts 2 and 3.


2
Language and Recursion
In 1871, Charles Darwin published The Descent of Man in Rela-
tion to Sex, in which he found the courage to declare that humans 
were descended from African apes. Just two years later, Friedrich 
Max Müller, who held the chair of philology at the University of 
Oxford, took exception:
There is one difficulty which Mr. Darwin has not sufficiently appreci-
ated. . . . There is between the whole animal kingdom on the one side, 
and man, even in his lowest state, on the other, a barrier which no ani-
mal has ever crossed, and that barrier is—Language. . . . If we removed 
the name of specific differences from our philosophical dictionaries, I 
should still hold that nothing deserves the name of man except what is 
able to speak . . . a speaking elephant or an elephantine speaker could 
never be called an elephant. Professor Schleicher, though an enthusias-
tic admirer of Darwin, observed once jokingly, but not without a deep 
meaning, “If a pig were to say to me, ‘I am a pig’ it would ipso facto 
cease to be a pig.”
Müller wrote in defiance of the ban on discussions of the evo-
lution of language, imposed in 1866 by the Linguistic Society of 
Paris, and shortly afterwards by the Philological Society of Lon-
don, but discussion of whether animal communication bore any 
resemblance to speech must have continued, even if surreptitiously. 
In 1919, Samuel Butler, the novelist, philosopher, and one-time 
New Zealand farmer, wrote:
In his latest article . . . Prof Garner says that the chatter of monkeys is 
not meaningless, but that they are conveying ideas to one another. This 
seems to me hazardous. The monkeys might with equal justice con-
clude that in our magazine articles, or literary and artistic criticisms, 
we are not chattering idly but are conveying ideas to one another.
1
2

The evidence suggests, though, that this is overly generous to mon-
keys and unkind to humans—although it may be accurate with 
respect to literary critics, even before postmodernism. So what is it 
that distinguishes human language from all other forms of animal 
communication?
Language as Recursion
As anticipated in chapter 1, a common answer is recursion, which 
provides for what Chomsky once referred to as the generativity of 
language.  Mark Hauser, Noam Chomsky and Tecumseh Fitch, in 
an influential article, have described recursion as the “minimum 
characteristic” distinguishing human language from animal com-
munication.  The capacity to embed structures within structures 
in recursive fashion has endowed our species with a limitless ca-
pacity to create sentences to express an equally unbounded set of 
possible meanings. At least within the limits of one’s memory and 
processing capacity, we can combine phrases to make sentences as 
long and complex as we like. The well-known children’s story, The 
House That Jack Built, again provides a useful example:
This is the house that Jack built.
This is the malt that lay in the house that Jack built.
This is the rat that ate the malt that lay in the house that Jack 
built.
This is the cat that killed the rat that ate the malt that lay in the 
house that Jack built.
And so on . . . and on. Young children quickly understand that the 
sentence can be extended ad infinitum, or at least until you run out 
of breath. The recursive rules of grammar also allow phrases to be 
moved around instead of simply being tacked on to the beginning 
or end. The most demanding kind of recursion is what is called 
center-embedded recursion, in which phrases are embedded within 
phrases, instead of being tacked on. For example, if one wanted 
to highlight the malt in the story, one could embed phrases as  
follows:
20   chapter 2
3
4

The malt that the rat that the cat killed ate lay in the house that 
Jack built.
This may require a moment or two to unpack. Too much con-
catenization like this can boggle the mind, probably because center- 
embedded recursion requires one to keep place markers where each 
phrase is interrupted by an embedded one. This places a strain 
on memory. In fact, sentences with more than one level of center-
embedding (the above sentence has three) are extremely rare, and 
considered by some to be incomprehensible.
The recursive nature of grammar can be expressed more for-
mally in the so-called rewrite rules that specify how grammati-
cal sentences are formed. As the examples from The House That 
Jack Built illustrate, sentences (S) can be constructed from phrases 
(P), which are then combined in recursive fashion. Three kinds 
of phrases are noun phrases (NP), verb phrases (VP), and prepo-
sitional phrases (PP). On a visit to a publishing house in Hove, 
England, I was once greeted by the publisher with the unlikely 
sentence Ribena is trickling down the chandeliers.  (It was.) Here, 
the sentence can be broken down into a NP (Ribena) and a VP (is 
trickling down the chandeliers). But the VP is itself composed of a 
verb (is trickling) plus a PP (down the chandeliers), which in turn is 
composed of a preposition (down) plus a NP (the chandeliers). 
The recursion is most apparent if these relations are expressed 
as rewrite rules:
1.   S → NP VP 
2.   NP → article noun PP
3.   VP → verb PP 
4.   PP → preposition NP
Here we see that the same phrasal elements can appear on either 
side of the rules that generate them. For example, a NP includes 
an optional PP, which in turn includes a NP. In principle, then, 
one could cycle repeatedly through rules 2 and 4. Had the pub-
lisher not been in something of a panic, he might have elaborated:  
Ribena is trickling down the chandeliers onto the carpet beside my 
desk. (By the way, there was a children’s crèche upstairs.)
language and Recursion   21
5
6
7

22   chapter 2
The structure of the sentence is also shown schematically in fig-
ure 4, which shows more clearly its hierarchical structure.
Once linguistic structures are established, we can then use lan-
guage to refer to language, at another level of recursion. Consider 
the following sentence:
This sentence is a sentence.
As we may remember from school days, a sentence needs a verb, 
and this one has the verb is so the sentence is indeed a sentence, 
and is therefore true. But we can take that sentence and embed it 
in another sentence, as follows:
“This sentence is a sentence” is a sentence.
As it turns out, this is also true. And of course we could continue 
to embed each sentence so formed into the format X is a sentence, 
ad infinitum.
Sentences are the basic units of language that allow us to ex-
press propositions about the world, and propositions are in turn 
descriptions about states or actions that have so-called truth-value, 
which is to say that they are either true or false. Correspondingly, 
the sentences that express propositions are generally also either 
true or false, which gives humans the possibly unique privilege 
of being able to lie. There are a few tricky sentences, though, that 
S
NP
VP
(art)
verb
noun
art
noun
PP
preposition
NP
Ribena is trickling down the chandeliers
Figure 4. Structure of the sentence “Ribena is trickling down the chandeliers.”

cannot be declared either true or false, such as the enigmatic This 
sentence is false. It cannot be true, for if it were it would be false, 
and if it were false it would be true, if you catch my drift. Sentences 
like this have greatly exercised philosophers and logicians, from 
Eubulides of Miletus in the fourth century BC to Bertrand Russell 
and others in the twentieth century, and we are best to leave it to 
them to sort them out.
Chomsky’s View of Language
The rewrite rules above are specific to a particular language, En­
glish. The rules are different for other languages, such as Chinese or  
Maori. Noam Chomsky has sought deeper rules that would apply 
to all languages. These rules are known as universal grammar. In 
the previous chapter I briefly referred to the most recent theory, 
known as the Minimalist Program,  according to which language, 
at its most fundamental level, can be reduced to a single operation, 
which Chomsky calls unbounded Merge. It is “unbounded” in the 
sense that it can be applied recursively, so that merged entities can 
themselves be merged to build up any desired level of complex-
ity. The above examples illustrate how words can be merged into 
phrases, and phrases into sentences. Phrases can also be merged to 
form more complex phrases. To expand on the example used by 
Tecumseh Fitch, and mentioned in the previous chapter, articles 
such as a, the, this, that, etc, can be merged with nouns, such as 
cat, dog, tree, lake, and so on, to create noun phrases, such as a 
dog, that dog, the lake, this tree, and so on. These can be merged 
with prepositions, such as by, near, beside, and so on, to create 
more complex noun phrases, such as near the tree, the dog beside 
the lake, a cat by that tree, and so on. 
The Merge operation, though, strictly holds for what Chomsky 
calls I-language, which is the internal language of thought, and 
need not apply directly to E-language, which is external language 
as actually spoken or signed. In mapping I-language to E-language, 
various supplementary principles are needed. For instance, in the 
example given in chapter 1, the merging of Jane loves John with 
language and Recursion   23
8

24   chapter 2
Jane flies airplanes to get Jane, who flies airplanes, loves John re-
quires extra rules to introduce the word who and delete one copy 
of the word Jane. I-language will map onto different E-languages 
in different ways. Chomsky’s notion of unbounded Merge, re-
cursively applied, is therefore essentially an idealization, inferred 
from the study of external languages, but is not itself directly 
observable.
Because I-language is assumed to be the basis of all language, 
Chomsky argues that it must have no external reference, and 
therefore cannot have evolved through natural selection. Instead, 
it must have emerged in a single step, perhaps a mutation, prob-
ably within the past 100,000 years. He writes as follows:
Within some small group from which we are descended, a rewiring of 
the brain took place in some individual, call him Prometheus, yielding 
the operation of unbounded Merge, applying to concepts with intri-
cate (and little understood) properties. . . . Prometheus’s language pro-
vides him with an infinite array of structured expressions.
The idea that the basis for language emerged in a single step in a 
single individual is remarkable, and smacks of the miraculous. It is 
nevertheless quite widely accepted that language evolved recently 
and was unique to Homo sapiens, and was perhaps even the prin-
cipal defining characteristic of our species.10 The question of how 
language evolved is considered more fully in chapter 4.
Although I-language is not directly observable, Chomsky has 
nevertheless felt confident in deriving its principles from observa-
tion of a single E-language. He was once quoted as saying: 
I have not hesitated to propose a general principle of linguistic struc-
ture on the basis of a single language. The inference is legitimate, on 
the assumption that humans are not specifically adapted to learn one 
rather than another human language. . . . Assuming that the genetically 
determined language faculty is a common human possession, we may 
conclude that a principle of language is universal if we are led to pos-
tulate it as a “precondition” for the acquisition of a single language.11
I-language is in essence the basis of universal grammar—the set 
of principles thought to underlie all languages.12 Universal gram-
9

mar has come under increasing attack in recent years, in part be-
cause of the sheer variety of languages and the rapidity with which 
they change.13 Michael Tomasello, for example, recently declared 
“Universal grammar is dead.” From a Chomskyan perspective, 
though, criticisms of universal grammar often miss their target, 
since individual languages are at a step removed from universal 
grammar itself. Nevertheless, these criticisms certainly challenge 
the view that the universal principles of language can be derived 
from a single language. Moreover, the sheer variety of human lan-
guages may threaten the view that I-language can be said to exist 
in anything like the form proposed by Chomsky.
To illustrate, let’s consider one example that seems about as re-
mote from English as it is possible to get.
The Pirahã
As young missionaries, Daniel L. Everett and his wife went to Bra-
zil in 1977 with the aim of converting a remote Brazilian tribe 
known as the Pirahã (pronounced roughly as peed’a-han) to Chris-
tianity. Their aim was to learn the language to the point that they 
could translate the Bible, and so expose the Pirahã to the teachings 
of Christ. The language was so impenetrable to foreigners that ear-
lier missionaries had been unable to learn it, but the Everetts lived 
among the Pirahã for six years, and Daniel Everett did succeed in 
acquiring their language.14
In the course of his stay there, he began to have doubts about re-
ligion, and eventually became an atheist. Everett’s religious doubt 
appears to have stemmed from his discovery that the Pirahã have 
little sense of time, and live essentially in the present. They have no 
fiction or creation myths, or any sense of history, which were no 
doubt formidable barriers to the understanding of Christianity, or 
indeed any religion. Everett’s interests shifted to linguistics, and at  
the time of writing he is a professor at the State University of Illinois  
at Normal.
Although the language was at first impenetrable, Everett also 
discovered it to be highly simplified in many ways, at least in terms 
language and Recursion   25

26   chapter 2
of grammar and vocabulary—although it is rich in morphology 
and prosody.15 It has no words for colors, and no words for num-
bers except for words that might be roughly translated as one, 
two, and many. There are no tenses other than a simple distinction 
between present and not-present, reflecting the fact that the Pirahã 
seem to live in the present, with little understanding of past or fu-
ture. Of special interest, though, is Everett’s claim that the Pirahã 
language has no embedding of phrases, and indeed no recursion. 
The Pirahã have remained monolingual despite more than 200 
years of trading with Portuguese-speaking Brazilians and speakers 
of other native languages. One might be tempted to think that the 
Pirahã suffer from some genetic defect, but this is firmly rejected 
by Everett, who knows them well.
No doubt a child born to Pirahã parents, but raised in Boston, 
would have no special difficulty learning Bostonian English. Ever-
ett also points out that the Pirahã use sentences without embedded 
phrases to say things that in other languages would be expressed 
in sentences with embedding. That is, they have thoughts involv-
ing recursion, but use nonrecursive language to express them. For 
example, the Pirahã have no verbs like say, want, or think, which 
in English are normally used with embedded clauses, as in I said 
that John intends to leave. In Pirahã this would be expressed as the 
equivalent of My saying John intend-leaves.16
In describing the grammatical paucity of Pirahã language, Ev-
erett is adamant that he is not casting any aspersions on their in-
telligence. “I am not,” he writes, “making a claim about Pirahã 
conceptual abilities but about their expression of certain concepts 
linguistically, and this is a crucial difference.”17 
Linguistic Diversity
Everett’s claims are understandably controversial.18 Nevertheless 
it is perhaps unlikely that the language of the Pirahã is particu-
larly unusual, and languages from other oral cultures may well 
exhibit similar features. For example, the Iatmul language of New 
Guinea is also said to have no recursion.  Nicholas Evans gives 
19

language and Recursion   27
another example from Bininj Gun-Wok, the term given to a group 
of dialects spoken in Western Arnhem Land in Australia. In that 
language, the English sentence They stood watching us fight is ren-
dered as the equivalent of They stood / they were watching us / we 
were fighting.20 
Linguists are becoming increasingly aware of the enormous di-
versity and sheer number of languages in non-Western and pre-
literate societies, to the point that universal grammar may be as 
much threatened with extinction as are the languages that threaten 
it.21 For example, the 10 million or so people who inhabit the 
island of New Guinea and its Melanesian surrounds speak some 
1,150 languages, which amounts to just under 10,000 people per 
language. In Vanuatu, with a total population of 195,000 people, 
105 different languages have been identified, with an average of 
less than 2,000 speakers per language. Australia boasts countless 
different indigenous languages, and the people of Arnhem Land 
are highly multilingual, often speaking as many as six languages by 
the time they are adults. According to one estimate, 17 countries 
hold 60 percent of all languages, but make up only 27 percent of 
the world’s population and 9 percent of its land area.22 Many of 
these languages are dying out, but they probably give a much bet-
ter appreciation of the nature of language as it emerged in hunter-
gatherer societies than as it has developed in Boston.
Nicholas Evans suggests that the diversity of language was not 
driven by geographic isolation, since they coexist in areas where 
there are no geographic barriers, and several different languages 
are often spoken within the same household. Language variation 
also seems to be driven by more than random drift. Evans sug-
gests that language serves as a kind of passport, marking the right 
to belong to a particular local society. As groups split off, they 
may make deliberate moves to differentiate their languages. For 
example, in the Uisia dialect of the Buin language on Bougain-
ville Island the gender agreements have all been reversed relative 
to those in the other dialects. All the masculine words have become 
feminine and all the feminine words masculine. This seems clearly 
a deliberate move to differentiate a particular subcommunity from 
the rest.23

28   chapter 2
Even the parts of speech, the building blocks of theories of gram-
mar, may not be universal. Nicholas Evans points out that there 
are languages without prepositions, adjectives, articles, or adverbs, 
and that there is no consensus among linguists on whether all lan-
guages even distinguish between nouns and verbs. Even if they do, 
it is not clear which words belong in which category. Evans gives 
the examples of paternal aunt, which is expressed by a verb in the 
Australian aboriginal language Ilgar; know, which is an adjective 
in Australian Kayardild; and love, which is simply a suffix in the 
South American language Tiriyo.24 In defense of universal gram-
mar, the psychologists Steven Pinker and Paul Bloom have claimed 
that “no language uses noun affixes to express tense.”25 But the 
language of the Kayardild does; it marks the past tense by adding 
the suffix -arra to the verb as well as the suffix -na to the noun that 
is the object of the verb. Such diversity imposes severe strain on 
any attempt to discover a coherent universal grammar.
Michael Tomasello concurs that “there are very few if any spe-
cific grammatical constructions or markers that are universally 
present in all languages.”26 He suggests that theories of language 
have been unduly influenced by the characteristics of written lan-
guage, and are therefore confined to only a tiny fraction of the 
world’s languages. Literacy emerged long after language itself, and 
is still far from universal. We should therefore not be contemptuous 
of the Pirahã, or indeed of other cultures relying on oral or signed 
communication and having no tradition of literacy. As mentioned 
above, even speakers of Western languages rarely use center- 
embedding in speech; an analysis of one corpus showed that 96 
percent of that clauses, as illustrated in The House That Jack Built, 
were end-embedded and only 3 percent were center-embedded. The 
remaining 1 percent were initially embedded (as in That Jack built 
the house is not disputed).27 Written language is more tolerant of 
multiple center-embedding, perhaps because the sentences remain 
in front of us while we try to process them. The ancient Greeks  
and Romans may have been partly to blame. Aristotle laid down 
the rules for the construction of sentences according to the doctrine  
of periods; a periodic sentence was defined as one with at least 
one center-embedding. The Latin scholars Cicero (106–43 BC) and 

language and Recursion   29
Livy (64 BC–AD 13) developed the periodic form, and their writ-
ing served as stylistic icons for centuries; their influence persists in 
the present-day languages of Europe.28 
It should be noted that, in principle at least, Chomsky’s ap-
proach does accommodate at least some degree of diversity in 
E-languages—the languages we actually speak or sign. The map-
ping from a universal I-language to E-language, he writes, “might 
turn out to be intricate, varied, and subject to accidental historical 
and cultural events: the Norman conquest, teen-age jargon, and 
so on.”  Diversity can also arise in the way in which different 
cultures fit E-language to the constraints of speech. This is called 
linearization, since spoken language, at least, is constrained by the 
fact that words are spoken strictly in sequence, whereas I-language 
is unconstrained by linearization. The critical question, then, is not 
whether the Chomskyan view can accommodate linguistic diver-
sity, but whether the degree of diversity recorded by authors such 
as Evans and Levinson could have arisen in so short a time. What 
seems more likely is that grammar itself evolved gradually rather 
than as a singular event within the past 100,000 years. Some views 
on how this might have happened are captured in the concept of 
grammaticalization.
Grammaticalization
If grammar does not depend on some inborn, universal set of prin-
ciples, what does it depend on? Grammaticalization is the view 
that it emerged through a gradual process, driven more by practi-
cal concerns than by any biological predisposition.30
One of the processes involved in grammaticalization has to do 
with the changing role of words, leading to more efficient and eco-
nomical expression.31 For example, many of the words we use do 
not refer to actual content, but serve functions that are purely gram-
matical. These are called function words, and include articles, such 
as a and the, prepositions such as at, on, or about, and auxiliaries 
such as will in They will come. Function words nevertheless almost 
certainly have their origins in content words. A classic example  
29

30   chapter 2
is the word have, which progressed from a verb meaning to seize 
or grasp (Latin capere), to one expressing possession (as in I have 
a pet porcupine; Latin habere), to a marker of the perfect tense (I 
have gone) and a marker of obligation (I have to go). Similarly, the 
word will probably progressed from a verb (as in Do what you 
will) to a marker of the future tense (They will laugh).
Another example comes from the word go. It still carries the 
meaning of travel, or making a move from one location to another, 
but in sentences like We’re going to have lunch it has been bleached 
of content and simply indicates the future. The phrase going to 
has been compressed into the form gonna, as in We’re gonna have 
lunch, or even I’m gonna go. Some of my friends in the United 
States make an additional compression when they say Let’s go eat, 
where we less hungry Kiwis say Let’s go and eat. I understand that 
Let’s go go-go is the battle song of the Chicago White Sox. This is 
language on the move—watch where go’s gonna go next. 
There are other ways in which grammaticalization operates to 
make communication at once more streamlined and less error-
prone. One has to do with the embedding and concatenization of 
phrases. For example, the statements He pushed the door and The 
door opened can be concatenated into He pushed the door open. 
Statements like My uncle is generous with money and My uncle 
helped my sister out can be concatenated by embedding the first 
in the second: My uncle, who is generous with money, helped my 
sister out. One can also alter the priority of the two statements by 
reversing the embedding: My uncle, who helped my sister out, is 
generous with money.
Efficiency can also be improved by breaking down concepts 
into component parts, which can then be recombined to form new 
concepts. An interesting example comes from a signed language. 
In Nicaragua deaf people were isolated from one another until 
the Sandinista government assumed power in 1979, and created 
the first schools for the deaf. Since that time, the children in these 
schools invented their own sign language, which has blended into 
the system now called Lenguaje de Signos Nicaragüense (NSL). In 
the course of time, NSL has changed from a system of holistic signs 
to a more combinatorial format. For example, one generation of 

language and Recursion   31
children were told a story of a cat that swallowed a bowling ball, 
and then rolled down a steep street in a “waving, wobbling man-
ner.” The children were then asked to sign the motion. Some in-
dicated the motion holistically, moving the hand downward in a 
waving motion. Others, however, segmented the motion into two 
signs, one representing downward motion and the other represent-
ing the waving motion, and this version increased after the first 
cohort of children had moved through the school.32 These two 
signs can then be individually combined with other signs to create 
new meanings.
One need not appeal to universal grammar to explain how this 
kind of segmentation occurs. Computer simulations have shown 
that cultural transmission can change a language that begins with 
holistic units into one in which sequences of forms are combined 
to produce meanings that were earlier expressed holistically.33 
In the Beginning Was the Word
According to the linguist Mark Aronoff, even words may have 
gained combinatorial structure over time. Words are generally 
considered to be made up of parts. At one level, they are com-
posed of phonemes, the smallest units of speech or signed language 
that make a difference to meaning. In English, the words cat and 
bat differ only in the first phoneme, with corresponding differ-
ences in meaning, but those same phonemes /c/ and /b/ are used in 
combinations with each other and with other phonemes to create 
countless other words. The “phonemes” (earlier called cheremes) 
of American Sign Language are defined in terms of location, hand 
configuration, and movement, and similarly combine to form dif-
ferent signed words.34 At the next level of structure, phonemes are 
themselves combined to form morphemes, which are the smallest 
units of meaning. Words like jump and cat are morphemes, but so 
are the endings of words that alter their grammatical status, such 
as the addition of -ed to signal the past tense, or the addition of -s 
to indicate the plural. Thus the words jumped and cats each con-
sist of two morphemes. Other morphemes change the meaning of a 

32   chapter 2
word, such as the addition of the prefix un- to reverse the meaning, 
as in happy and unhappy.
Aronoff is among a group of linguists who have documented 
the emergence of ABSL, the signed language of the Al-Sayyid, a 
Bedouin community of some 3,500 individuals in the Negev Des-
ert in Israel. Some 150 of the people living there have inherited a 
condition that has left them profoundly deaf. Although the deaf 
are in the minority, ABSL is widely used in the community, along 
with a spoken dialect of Arabic. It is a recent language, now in 
only its third generation of signers, and may be regarded as still in 
its infancy. Aronoff has remarked, though, that ABSL has no pho-
nemes or morphemes. Each signed word is essentially a whole, not 
decomposable into parts.35
In this respect, ABSL seems to defy what has been called dual-
ity of patterning, the fact that language involves combinations of 
elements at two levels, the phonological and the grammatical. The 
linguist Charles F. Hockett listed duality of patterning as one of 
the “design features” of language,36 so its absence in ABSL may be 
taken to mean that ABSL is not a true language. Yet Hockett him-
self recognized that the design features did not appear all at once, 
and that duality of patterning was probably a latecomer:
There is excellent reason to believe that duality of patterning was the 
last property to be developed, because one can find little if any reason 
why a communication system should have this property unless it is 
highly complicated. If a vocal-auditory system comes to have a larger 
and larger number of distinct meaningful elements, those elements in-
evitably come to be more and more similar to one another in sound. 
There is a practical limit, for any species or any machine, to the num-
ber of distinct stimuli that can be discriminated, especially when the 
discriminations typically have to be made in noisy conditions.37
ABSL, then, may be regarded as a language in the early stages of 
development. Aronoff concludes that words are the primary ele-
ments, and do not acquire phonology or morphology until they 
are thrust upon them. As the title of one of his recent articles aptly 
puts it, “In the beginning was the word.”38 
Morphology may well arise with the compression of what were 

language and Recursion   33
separate words into compounds. For example, the addition of -ed 
to a verb to signal the past tense probably derives from the verb 
to do. Hence, roughly speaking, sentences like He laughed may 
have derived from something like He laugh did.  This follows a 
dictum stated by the functional linguist Talmy (“Tom”) Givón that 
“Today’s morphology is yesterday’s syntax.”40 
The story that is beginning to emerge, then, is that language 
does not appear fully formed in different cultures as a product of 
universal grammar, but comes about gradually as a product of cul-
ture and accumulated experience, and a practical concern to make 
communication more efficient. That is, it grammaticalizes itself. It 
adjusts in somewhat the same way as my computer system for fil-
ing reprints has adjusted, with folders eventually gaining folders, 
and these in turn gaining further embedded folders. As my collec-
tion of reprints grows, my folders have embedded folders thrust 
upon them.
This does not mean that language has no genetic component—it 
is, after all, restricted to our own species, as I shall argue in the 
next chapter. It remains something of an open question just how 
much of language depends on innate components specific to lan-
guage itself, and how much on more general aspects of the hu-
man mind. It may depend not so much on what Steven Pinker,  
echoing Chomsky’s notion of universal grammar, called “the lan-
guage instinct”41 as on what has been termed an “instinct for in-
ventiveness,”42 coupled with a drive toward increased efficiency, 
that covers many other aspects of our lives, including art, music, 
and machines—not to mention filing systems.
What of Recursion, Then?
Languages, then, appear to have evolved gradually, adapting them-
selves to particular cultures, and undergoing progressive modifica-
tions. In the case of the Pirahã, for example, their lack of concern 
for time seems to have been critical. Everett writes:
[The] apparently disjointed facts about the Pirahã language—gaps that 
are very surprising from just about any grammarian’s perspective— 
39

34   chapter 2
ultimately derive from a single cultural constraint in Pirahã, namely, 
the restriction of communication to the immediate experience of the 
interlocutors.43
Morten Christiansen and Nick Chater, in an influential article,44 
suggest that the sheer diversity of languages, and the rapidity with 
which they change, mean that language adapted to the brain, rather 
than the brain adapting to language. That adaptation, moreover, 
must have depended on mental functions that were not themselves 
primarily linguistic, and that were heavily influenced by environ-
mental factors such as culture and geography.
The nature of those thought processes is explored in later chap-
ters of this book. In particular, I will focus on mental time travel 
and theory of mind as nonlinguistic processes involving recursive 
processes that shaped how language evolved. Whereas Chomsky 
viewed thought through the lens of language, I (and others) sug-
gest that language should be viewed through the lens of thought. 
This can have a liberating effect on our understanding of language 
and its evolution. 
First, language can be understood to have evolved gradually, 
rather than as having emerged suddenly in some comparatively 
recent individual on the family tree, called Prometheus. We can 
suppose instead that language adapted to the cultural and practi-
cal demands faced by our forbears over several millennia, rather 
than just over the past 100,000 years. Prometheus, in short, can 
be unbound. 
Second, any universal principles underlying language can be re-
garded as principles of human thought, and not specific to lan-
guage. Even recursion appears not to be universal, and may be ab-
sent in many indigenous languages. There is therefore some doubt 
about whether it is truly the “minimum characteristic” that distin-
guishes human language from animal communication, as recently 
claimed.45 The fact that many, perhaps most, human languages use 
recursion is of course good evidence that the human mind is ca-
pable of it, even if language can generate any number of different 
meanings without it. In oral societies such as the Pirahã, word 
combinations and repetition of phrases may be sufficient to gener-

language and Recursion   35
ate all of the meanings required without recourse to the embed-
ding of phrases or other recursive devices. And as Everett pointed 
out, there is no question that the Pirahã are capable of recursive 
thought.
It is perhaps ironic that a human capacity often said to depend 
on recursion can function without it, at least in the sense of phrases 
being embedded in phrases—languages like Pirahã may well be 
recursive in that the I-language underlying them may depend on 
a recursive operation, such as Chomsky’s Merge. Moreover, lan-
guage might still depend on the recursive nature of theory of mind, 
as I argue in chapter 9. It might be suggested that recursion is 
merely part of a toolkit for constructing language, and that not all 
languages use all of the tools.4  A universal toolkit, though, is not 
quite the same as universal grammar. What the use of recursion in 
language does illustrate, though, is that recursion is a property of 
the human mind, employed when needed. As we shall see in later 
chapters, it is not specific to language. 
That said, it remains highly likely that language itself is spe-
cific to humans. We have a compulsion to talk, or develop signing  
systems if speech is prevented, and children do seem to go through 
preprogrammed steps in learning language. The emergence of lan-
guage in our species probably depended on the evolution of in-
tentional systems of thought, and the adaptiveness of sharing our 
thoughts. The communicative imperative also drove anatomical 
changes, such as the redesign of the vocal tract to permit greater 
variety of sounds, and perhaps changes in breathing and inten-
tional control. 
These matters are discussed in later chapters. The more immedi-
ate matter of concern is whether animals other than humans can 
be said to possess anything resembling human language.
6

3
Do Animals Have Language?
The least thing upset him on the links. He missed short putts  
because of the uproar of the butterflies in the adjoining meadows.
—from The Clicking of Cuthbert, by P. G. Wodehouse
Having grown up on a farm, I suspect that the above quotation is  
an unwarranted slur on the gentle butterfly, but vocalization is ubiq-
uitous among animals, including insects—and of course ourselves. 
It has therefore seemed natural to suppose that human language 
must have evolved from animal calls. Only in fiction, though, do 
animals actually speak and hold meaningful conversations. Most 
examples, from Winnie the Pooh to the Beatrix Potter books, are 
written for children, but my favorite example comes from a short 
story entitled Tobermory, by Saki, who made a brief appearance 
in the previous chapter. Tobermory is a cat who has been taught 
to speak, to the consternation of guests at a house party. Here is 
what Tobermory says to a woman who is foolish enough to ask his 
opinion of her intelligence:
“You put me in an embarrassing position,” said Tobermory, whose 
tone and attitude certainly did not suggest a shred of embarrassment. 
“When your inclusion in the house party was suggested Sir Wilfred 
protested that you were the most brainless woman of his acquain-
tance, and that there was a wide distinction between hospitality and 
the care of the feeble-minded. Lady Blemley replied that your lack of 
brain-power was the precise quality which had earned you your invi-
tation, as you were the only person she could think of who might be 
idiotic enough to buy their old car.”1
To everyone’s relief, Tobermory was killed shortly afterwards by a 
tomcat from the Rectory.

Do Animals Have Language?   37
In most respects, though, animal vocalizations have little in com-
mon with human speech. For the most part, they are genetically 
fixed, and under emotional rather than voluntary control. They are 
organized in the midbrain, with little or no input from the cortex, 
the seat of higher mental functions. For example, electrical stimu-
lation of a region of the midbrain called the periaqueductal grey 
induces hissing, growling, screaming, howling, and meowing in the 
cat, shrieking, yelling, yapping, cackling, and trilling in the squir-
rel monkey, echolocation sounds in the bat, and laughing in hu-
mans. These vocalizations seem to be organized downstream from 
the periaqueductal grey, in the ancient depths of the brain.2 Thus, 
destruction of the periaqueductal grey causes rats, cats, squirrel 
monkeys, and humans to become mute.
Human laughter, then, belongs in the category of innate vocal-
izations unrelated to speech, and is correspondingly difficult to 
produce voluntarily or to suppress. Robert Provine, in his book 
Laughter: A Scientific Investigation, records that a girls’ boarding 
school in Tanzania had to be closed because of an uncontrollable 
epidemic of hysterical laughter.3 And conversely, it takes a trained 
actor to laugh convincingly in the absence of the emotional state, 
although my father, being Irish, was able to laugh uproariously at 
incomprehensible jokes told by his mates. This only led to embar-
rassment when others phoned later to ask the point of the joke, 
and he had to confess that he didn’t know.
Even the calls of chimpanzees, our closest living relatives, ap-
pear to be largely involuntary. Jane Goodall, who lived among 
the chimpanzees in the wild at Gombe National Park in Tanzania, 
once recorded the instance of a young chimp that had discovered a 
cache of bananas, and evidently wanted to keep them for himself. 
But when chimpanzees discover food, they characteristically emit 
a pant hoot call, drawing the attention of other members in the 
troop. The young chimpanzee was unable to suppress the emotion-
ally driven call, but did the best he could to muffle it by placing a 
hand over his mouth. Conversely, chimpanzees find it difficult to 
produce a call voluntarily. Goodall remarks, “The production of 
sound in the absence of the appropriate emotional state seems to 
be almost an impossible task for a chimpanzee.”4
This may nevertheless be something of an exaggeration. Different  

38   chapter 3
pant hoot calls have been recorded in different regions of Africa, 
suggesting a degree of cultural influence. But even here the varia-
tion may not be so much in the actual sounds as in their timing.5 
Pant hoots are often accompanied by drumming, in which the ani-
mals repeatedly hit their hands or feet against a surface—includ-
ing their own chests. Groups have a characteristic beat, and the 
resulting differences may serve as identification tags, allowing the 
animals to maintain contact. Chest beating, along with threatening 
movements and vocalizations, is also well documented in moun-
tain gorillas.6 These repetitive vocalizations and drumming may 
explain the origins of rock concerts, rather than of speech.
Chimpanzees also modify their calls in other ways. When un-
der attack, chimps scream, and one study has shown that their 
screams have different acoustic structure if there is a listener in 
the audience of higher rank than the aggressor.7 In another study, 
captive chimps were more likely to produce two attention-getting 
sounds, the “raspberry” and the “extended grunt,” when a human 
appeared with a favorite food than when either the human or the 
food appeared alone.8 Such observations suggest a limited degree 
of voluntary control, although these variations may also be under 
subtle emotional control. Perhaps it’s a bit like the limited way we 
can modify emotional sounds such as laughing or crying, depend-
ing on the audience, or on the status of the person we’re respond-
ing to.
In some respects, chimpanzees and other great apes, despite be-
ing our closest living relatives among the primates, may not pro-
vide a good primate model for the voluntary control of vocaliza-
tion.9 Charles T. Snowdon somewhat bemusedly refers to “the 
silence of the apes”;10 the great apes, he says, simply don’t vocalize 
much at all, at least in comparison with other primates, includ-
ing ourselves. The primates of the Amazon, in contrast, join in 
the frenzy of sound created by frogs, birds, and other creatures in 
the rain forest, where vocalization presumably acts as a signal to 
distinguish one species from another. Snowdon claims to be able 
to locate a group of pygmy marmosets, the world’s smallest mon-
keys, simply by listening for their distinctive and persistent vocal-
izations. The mountain gorillas of Rwanda, on the other hand, 

Do Animals Have Language?   39
are especially conspicuous for their silence, at least according to 
Snowdon.11 Maybe they are just strong, silent types, more into 
chest-beating displays than flights of vocal eloquence. And maybe, 
too, it’s sometimes the strong, silent, Tarzan type, rather than the 
rock star, who gets the girl.12
There may also be better voluntary control of vocalization in 
primates more distantly related to humans than are the great apes. 
Macaques can learn to increase the rate of vocalization to gain 
food reward or avoid shock, but this is abolished by bilateral de-
struction of a cortical area known as the anterior cingulate.13 In 
squirrel monkeys, destruction of this area abolishes spontaneously 
uttered long-distance calls, but leaves intact the animals’ ability 
to respond with contact calls to contact calls made by others.14 In 
these cases, the calls themselves are innate, but their production 
appears to be under some intentional control, mediated by the an-
terior cingulate. Japanese monkeys have been taught to emit “coo” 
calls to make requests, also suggesting a degree of voluntary con-
trol. More provocatively, it is claimed that they can modify their 
coos in order to receive either food or tools, suggesting that they 
may have been able to bring their vocalizations partly under the 
control of the motor cortex.15 It has also been suggested, though, 
that the coo sound was entirely involuntary, the result of an un-
conscious link, well documented in humans as well as primates, 
between limb movements and vocalization.16 
Human speech is not only intentional, it also requires the learn-
ing of new sound patterns. Although most animals and many birds 
vocalize, very few are capable of vocal learning. Just why this is so 
is something of a mystery. Erich D. Jarvis suggests that there has 
been selection against vocal learning because it introduces varia-
tion, and makes the calls more noticeable to predators—just as we 
humans tend to notice the sound of a new voice. Jarvis suggests 
that animals that do learn new patterns are the ones without major 
predators, with humans at the top of the list. Apart from humans, 
killer whales are the top predators of the ocean, and are vocal learn-
ers. Adult elephants are also vocal learners, and do not have natu-
ral predators, although lions, hyenas, and crocodiles sometimes 
prey on young elephants. Another vocal learner, the hummingbird, 

40   chapter 3
is said to be fearless, because it can easily escape predation through 
rapid flight, and songbirds such as parrots and ravens can evade 
predation through effective mobbing behavior.17 One may wonder, 
though, why the dominant cats of the African savannah, such as 
the lion (king of the jungle), are not vocal learners. Perhaps they 
are, and no one has dared get close enough to find out. Or maybe 
they learned to keep quiet, and so escape notice, when humans 
developed the facility to kill them (and everything else).
Another suggestion is that innately programmed vocalizations 
can’t be faked, and can therefore be trusted.18 If an animal cries 
“wolf” it is important that a wolf be actually present, otherwise 
her mates may not believe her next time and fall victim to that 
voracious animal. Human talk, in contrast, is notoriously untrust-
worthy, as the poet Robert Graves warns in his poem Beware 
Madam!
Beware, madam, of the witty devil
The arch intriguer who walks disguised
In a poet’s cloak, his gay tongue oozing evil.
The idea that animal communication cannot be faked has been 
challenged, though,19 and we might at least make an exception of 
birds, some of whom sing to deceive by imitating other birds, or 
even humans. The lyre bird in Australia is said to be able to imitate 
the sound of a beer can being opened, although with wine having 
largely displaced beer as the national drink in that country we 
might expect these birds soon to imitate the popping of corks.20
If animals aren’t conversing with one another, one may well ask  
what all the noise is about. Usually, it has to do with essentially 
instinctive or emotional situations such as mating, aggression, ter-
ritorial claim, or warning of predators. One of the most studied 
examples is the vervet monkey, which has separate cries to warn  
of the presence of a snake, an eagle, a leopard, a smaller cat, and 
a baboon, and when monkeys hear these calls they act appropri-
ately—running up into the trees, for example, in response to the 
leopard call.21 Even those birds that learn new patterns of sound 
appear not to be conversing, or conveying new information. Erich  
Jarvis suggests that vocal learning evolved in the first instance not 

Do Animals Have Language?   41
to transmit meaning, but rather to defend territory22 and attract 
mates. In humans, as in songbirds, singing is an activity that at-
tracts potential mates and allows individuals to establish them-
selves as sex icons. I have a colleague who once traveled a con-
siderable distance to join a queue to be kissed by Elvis.23 This 
raises the intriguing possibility that speech evolved from singing, 
an idea explored by Steven Mithen in his 2005 book The Singing 
Neanderthals.24 
Vocal learning is often employed in order to imitate, as in the 
case of the lyre bird. Imitation presumably enables the imitator  
to encroach on the territory of another species, and take advantage 
of their resources. Some animals have even proven to be adept 
at imitating human speech. In his 1997 book The Symbolic Spe-
cies, Terrence Deacon records his astonishment when, as he was 
passing in front of the Boston Aquarium, a voice called out “Hey! 
Hey! Get outa there!”25 It came from Hoover, the now legendary 
talking seal, who died, sadly, in 1986. An elephant named Kosik 
at a South Korean Zoo has recently been recorded uttering several 
Korean words and phrases. The vocal range of elephants is nor-
mally too low for humans to hear, but Kosik has found a way to 
curl his trunk into his mouth and blow into it, and so create fre-
quencies high enough to produce sounds recognizable as speech.26 
But simple imitation is not the same as speech produced through 
the use of grammatical rules. Closer to the mark was Alex, an 
African gray parrot, who also died recently. Alex’s voice has been 
described as like a recording from an old-style Victrola.27 He did 
not merely mimic, but was able to answer simple questions about 
the colors or shapes of objects, or about the number of objects up 
to about six. He was said to have had the speech capabilities of a 
two-year-old human child.28 This is progress indeed, but just as 
the two-year-old has not yet developed true grammatical speech, 
neither did Alex. 
For the birds, I should also mention another African gray par-
rot called N’kisi, and featured in a BBC News report of 26 Janu-
ary, 2004. N’kisi belongs to Aimee Morgana (or her to him), and 
is said to have a vocabulary of 950 words and to generate novel 
utterances. He appears to have a mischievous sense of humor. On 

42   chapter 3
one occasion he met Dr. Jane Goodall, well known for having lived 
among, studied, and befriended chimpanzees in the wild. Having 
previously seen her in a picture with chimpanzees, N’kisi asked, 
“Got a chimp?” He apparently has some understanding of gram-
mar, and it is claimed that he once said “flied” for “flew”—the kind 
of error often made by young children who have learned morpho-
logical rules but not yet learned the exceptions. More dramatically 
still, it is claimed that N’kisi has the power of telepathy, and Aimee 
Morgana has teamed with Dr. Rupert Sheldrake, whose most re-
cent book is entitled Dogs That Know When Their Owners Are 
Coming Home, to demonstrate this power. N’kisi, they say, can 
telepathically surf the leading edge of Aimee’s consciousness.
I relate this, not to argue that parrots possess language, or to 
convince you that telepathy exists, even if restricted to dogs and 
parrots. Rather, claims of this sort appear all the time, but nearly 
always prove to be without solid foundation. As far as I know, 
N’kisi’s exploits have yet to be subjected to rigorous scientific test-
ing, or published in a reputable scientific journal.29 Even so, a closed 
mind on the subject—as on any subject—is not recommended, and 
may deny your parrot, or your dog, the chance to surf.
And we do need to be especially careful in drawing inferences 
about the mental capacities of nonhuman animals, especially in 
light of the famous 1904 case of Clever Hans, a horse. According 
to his trainer, Clever Hans could answer complex questions by tap-
ping out letters of the alphabet with a front hoof, with each letter 
represented by a different number of taps. When asked “What is 
two-fifths plus one-half?” he stamped his hoof nine times, paused, 
and stamped another 10 times, apparently indicating that the an-
swer was nine-tenths. Even the leading psychologist of the day, 
Professor Stumpf of the University of Berlin, was convinced of the 
horse’s genius, until one of his students, Oskar Pfungst, showed 
that Clever Hans was actually responding to subtle signals given 
by his trainer. The trainer himself apparently did not realize that 
he, and not Clever Hans, was generating the answers.
What, then, of our closest relatives, the chimpanzee and bo­
nobo?30 Even at the acoustic level, without any consideration of 
meaning, the vocal exchanges between chimpanzees differ mark-

Do Animals Have Language?   43
edly from the exchanges that occur in human conversation. When 
people converse, they generally choose words, and therefore sounds,  
that are different from those they have just heard—the answer to a 
question, for example, is not the same as the question itself, unless 
perhaps it comes from a postmodernist, or a psychoanalyst. The 
sounds that chimpanzees emit during vocal exchanges are similar 
to what they have just heard.31 Their echoed exchanges probably 
have to do simply with maintaining contact, rather than with tell-
ing what Bobo said to Mimi last night over dinner. 
Attempts to teach our great ape cousins to speak have been no-
toriously unsuccessful. The best-known attempt was that of Cathy 
and Keith Hayes, a husband-and-wife team, who raised a baby 
chimp called Viki in their own home, along with their own chil-
dren, hoping that speech would come as naturally to Viki as to 
the other kids. But it did not. At best, Viki was able to produce 
crude, approximations to three or four words: mama, papa, cup, 
and possibly up.32 These painful efforts were whispered rather 
than vocalized, suggesting that at least part of the problem lay in 
the vocal component itself. But even the whispered attempts were 
far removed from the effortless, articulate, but often infuriating 
chatter of a bright three-year-old human. Chimps, then, seem to be 
distinctly at a loss for words. Parrots can do a much better job of 
articulating something like human speech than any primate can.
Another classic case is reported by the pioneering Russian psy-
chologist Nadesha Ladygina-Kohts, who undertook detailed studies 
of a baby chimpanzee called Joni, and compared his development 
with that of her son Roodi.33 Joni learned nothing approximating 
speech, but nevertheless loved to make sounds, including laughter. 
He also snored in a manner indistinguishable from that of a child. 
His vocalizations, though diverse, were attributable largely to his 
emotional state. Oddly, he could imitate the barking of a dog,34 
but not the sounds of human speech. Ladygina-Kohts grew almost 
as attached to Joni as to her own son, and her studies of Joni’s 
behavior were meticulous and insightful, but she nevertheless con-
cludes her book with a paean to human superiority, based largely 
on our unique language ability. After noting the “equalities” be-
tween child and chimp, she writes:

44   chapter 3
And, as soon as we take the child’s verbal expression into consider-
ation we immediately have to change these “equals” signs we were 
about to put between the intellectual capacities of a 4-year-old child 
and his chimpanzee counterpart. We change the equals sign into the 
sign >, which still does not look expressive enough; you want to say, or 
rather yell, not only more, but better, qualitatively higher, and incom-
parably, inexpressibly more perfect!35
Do Animals Understand Us?
Although nonhuman animals have little or no ability to produce 
anything resembling human speech, they may have surprising abil-
ity to understand it. One of the more remarkable instances comes, 
not from an ape, but from a border collie.36 His name is Rico, 
and he is able to respond accurately to spoken requests to fetch 
different objects from another room, and then to either place the 
designated object in a box or bring it to a particular person. In ex-
perimental trials, he was given 10 objects randomly selected from 
200 objects that he knows, and chose correctly in 37 out of 40 tri-
als. Rico collects the designated object from a room in which there 
is no person who might cue him about the correct selection, which 
rules out any “Clever Hans” effect. If he is given an unfamiliar 
name of an object to fetch, he will choose the one object among 
the otherwise familiar selection that is novel. Four weeks later, he 
demonstrates that he still knows the name of this object, indicat-
ing what has been termed “learning by exclusion.” This ability to 
apply a label on a single trial is known as “fast mapping,” and has 
hitherto been thought to be restricted to humans.37 Rico’s exploits 
may not come as a surprise to people convinced that their pet dogs 
or cats can understand them.
Rico’s performance is somewhat comparable to that of Kanzi, a 
bonobo raised by Sue Savage-Rumbaugh. Kanzi is unable to speak, 
but as we shall see he has acquired an impressive facility to com-
municate by using manual gestures. What is interesting here is that 
his ability to understand spoken language far exceeds his ability to 
produce it. He can respond correctly to quite long sentences. For 

Do Animals Have Language?   45
example, when asked, “Would you put some grapes in the swim-
ming pool?” he immediately got out of the water, fetched some 
grapes, and tossed them into the pool. When visiting his friend 
Austin, a chimpanzee, he was told, “You can have some cereal if 
you give Austin your monster mask to play with.” He responded 
by finding his mask and giving it to Austin, and then pointing to 
Austin’s cereal. His ability to respond to such commands is not 
perfect, though. In one controlled study, he was given a list of 660 
unusual spoken commands, some of them eight words long, and 
responded correctly on 72 percent of them. Kanzi was nine at the 
time, and did a little better than a two-and-a-half-year-old girl 
called Alia, who managed to get 66 percent correct.38
These examples suggest that comprehension of speech far out-
strips production, also a common observation in children acquir-
ing language.39 They also suggest a surprising ability to break sen-
tences down into words, hitherto considered a uniquely human 
capacity. Although this is something that seems natural to most 
of us, there is virtually nothing in the acoustic signal that tells us 
where one word ends and another begins,40 and it is really only 
experience with the language that enables us to break a sentence 
down in this way.41 Doyoufollowme? We become aware of this 
only when listening to a language that is completely foreign, when 
all the words seem to run together in a meaningless babble. When 
we teach children to speak, we help them to separate the words 
with an exaggerated form of speech known as “motherese.”42 The 
surprise, then, is not just that Rico and Kanzi were able to respond 
correctly to words, it is that they were able to pick them out at 
all. One must also suppose that they are not unique among their 
species—presumably, other apes and mammals are capable of the 
same thing, given the right conditions of learning. Keep talking to 
your cat.
It is unlikely, though, that the understanding exhibited by Rico 
and Kanzi—one hopes they might one day meet—meets the defi-
nition of true language comprehension. The identification of key 
words may be sufficient to provide the correct response most of 
the time. All Rico needs to know is the name of the object and 
the name of the recipient (box or person), and the rest follows.  

46   chapter 3
Although the sentence “You can have some cereal if you give Austin 
your monster mask to play with” involves recursion (specifically 
end-recursion), Kanzi probably did not need to parse the sentence 
in order to understand what he needed to do. He just needed to 
pick out the words cereal, Austin, and mask to have a pretty good 
idea of what was required.43
The exploits of Rico and Kanzi nevertheless clearly depend on 
sophisticated analysis of acoustic signals, to a level well beyond the 
sounds they are actually able to produce. Although their calls seem 
to be largely fixed and under emotional control, animals hear a lot 
of different sounds in the wild, and need to be able to discriminate 
among them and at times take appropriate action. These sounds 
include the calls of other animals, including those of predatory 
humans. In the jungle, you need to stay tuned.
What about Signs?
Most nonhuman animals are highly vocal, but seem incapable of 
anything resembling human speech. The fact that some animals, 
at least, can understand speech suggests that any linguistic deficit 
may have to do with the production of intentional, learned vocal 
output, and not necessarily with language itself. Language, though, 
need not be vocal. The signed languages of the deaf are now clearly 
recognized as true languages, with an expressive power equal to 
that of speech—and in the next chapter I argue that human lan-
guage evolved from manual gestures, and not from vocalizations. 
In literate societies reading and writing also comprise a form of 
language that can be accomplished without sound.44 
A hint that it might be possible to teach visual language to apes 
came from an observation made by the English diarist Samuel 
Pepys. In 1661, he saw a strange creature, probably a chimpanzee 
or gorilla,45 which had been brought from Guinea, and wrote that 
it was “so much like a man in most things . . . I cannot believe it is a 
monster got of a man and a she-baboon. I do believe it readily un-
derstands much English; and I am of a mind it might be taught to 
speak and make signs.” He was wrong about speaking; as we have 

Do Animals Have Language?   47
seen, there is no evidence whatsoever that any nonhuman primate 
can produce anything resembling human speech.
Pepys may have struck a seam of truth, though, in his suggestion 
that an ape might be taught to make signs. Primates, including 
apes, have hands and a manual control system that is well adapted 
for grasping and manipulating things, and is much better adapted 
to learning and intentional control than is their vocal system. This 
realization led Allen and Beatrix Gardner to develop a system of 
signs, based loosely on American Sign Language, in an attempt to 
communicate with a young chimpanzee called Washoe. This was 
indeed much more successful than earlier attempts to teach chim-
panzees to speak. Washoe learned well over 100 gestures, in marked 
contrast to the mere three or four words that Viki had attempted 
to mouth. Washoe’s first signed “word” was more, made by bring-
ing the hands together in front of the body. She used this sign in 
combination with other signs to request more treats, such as ba-
nanas or tickles.46 Later, Francine Patterson taught a gorilla named 
Koko at least 375 signs, and claimed that Koko could use these 
signs in inventive, human-like ways, to lie, swear, and pour scorn. 
Patterson even claimed to have measured Koko’s IQ at somewhere 
between 84 and 95.47
The most impressive results so far, though, are those obtained 
by Sue Savage-Rumbaugh with the bonobo Kanzi, using an ap-
proach based more on reading than on signed language. Kanzi 
communicates by pointing to keys on a keyboard containing 256 
symbols denoting objects and actions, and has supplemented these 
with manual gestures of his own devising. The symbols, known as 
lexigrams, are deliberately selected not to bear any physical resem-
blance to the objects or actions they represent. There also seems 
little doubt that Kanzi can produce novel sequences by pointing to 
combinations of lexigrams on the keyboard, although these com-
binations are meager compared to human language. His “utter-
ances” are two- or three-word combinations, such as hide peanut, 
chase you, hot water there, or child-side food surprise.48 
There has been considerable debate, though, about whether 
Kanzi has acquired true language, and the general consensus is that 
he has not, and that these simple combinations do not constitute 

48   chapter 3
true recursive grammar. Steven Pinker remarked that great apes, 
for all their linguistic exploits, “just don’t ‘get it.’ ”49 Of course, this 
may reflect a desperate longing to cling to the notion of human 
superiority, but it is nevertheless clear that Kanzi has a long way to 
go, if he is to get there at all. At a recent conference on the evolu-
tion of language, held in Paris, it was suggested that Kanzi himself 
might appear at the following conference, two years later, and de-
liver a talk. Careful inspection of the presenters at that conference 
persuaded me that Kanzi was not one of them.50
Although Kanzi is perhaps the star among nonhuman animals in 
his linguistic prowess, others are not so far behind. These include 
other great apes (gorillas and orangutans),51 dolphins,52 sea lions, 
and Alex, the African gray parrot.53 The linguist Derek Bickerton 
coined the term “protolanguage” to refer to the ability to form or 
understand simple combinations of symbols, but without gram-
mar.54 It has been claimed that this is the level of language at-
tained, not only by the species mentioned above, but also by two-
year-old children, speakers of pidgin languages, those with certain 
brain injuries preventing fluent speech, and drunken teenagers.55 
Figure 5. Panbanisha, Kanzi’s adopted sister, communicating with lexigrams. 
Photo by Malcolm Linton.

Do Animals Have Language?   49
In the child, grammar develops between the ages of about two and 
four. This stage is part of childhood, which may be unique to hu-
mans, and critical to the development of other aspects of thought 
peculiar to humans—a point elaborated in chapter 11. Bickerton 
has proposed that protolanguage is the platform upon which fully 
grammatical language was built in the course of evolution, a view 
reiterated by Ray Jackendoff in a recent landmark book.56
Another view of protolanguage, at least as manifest in nonhu-
man animals, is that it is simply a form of problem solving. Indeed 
the linguistic exploits of Kanzi and other apes seem comparable in 
many ways to the problem-solving activities of the chimpanzees 
described in the famous experiments of the German psychologist 
Wolfgang Köhler. When the chimps were presented with problems 
to solve, Köhler noted that the solution often seemed to come sud-
denly, as though through a flash of insight, and the solution often 
involved combining two objects, or two ideas, in a novel way. For 
example, the most “intelligent” of the chimps, Sultan, once figured 
out how to rake in food that was just out of reach by joining two 
pieces of bamboo together to make a rake long enough to reach the  
food. On another occasion, he used a small bamboo stick to rake 
in a longer one that was out of reach, and then used the longer 
stick to rake in food.57 These acts seem little different in principle 
from the combining of communicative gestures, and many of the 
“requests” generated by the so-called linguistic apes are also pro-
duced with the aim of receiving food.58
More recently, Michael Tomasello has demonstrated similar 
problem-solving ability in chimpanzees, and made the interest-
ing observation that they do not seem to learn by imitating oth-
ers. When there were two ways to rake in food, chimps preferred 
to work out their own way of doing it, and were not influenced 
by having seen it done the other way. Children, in contrast, are 
more likely to copy what they have seen.59 This apparent lack of 
imitative ability in the chimp may partially explain why they have 
not pressed on to Churchillian feats of oratory, or the building of 
jumbo jets. Daniel Povinelli has also explored the abilities of chim-
panzees to solve mechanical problems, and seems more impressed  
by their obtuse lack of understanding of the physical world than by 

50   chapter 3
their occasional successes.60 In the see-saw world of primatology, 
however, there is now evidence that chimpanzees may not only 
learn different ways of solving mechanical problems, but may 
transmit them to others in their group, suggesting a rudimentary 
basis for the establishment of culture.61 It may be the chimpanzee’s 
uncomfortable resemblance to ourselves that makes their mental 
abilities so much a matter of contention.
A curious feature of protolanguage as revealed by Kanzi and 
the other so-called linguistic apes is that there is little evidence for 
comparable communication among apes in the wild, or in natu-
ralistic settings. Nevertheless they do gesture. Joanne Tanner and 
Richard Byrne counted some 30 different gestures made by low-
land gorillas in the San Francisco Zoo, where the animals, cousins 
to those strong silent mountain gorillas we encountered earlier, are 
enclosed in a large, naturalistic setting. These gestures are closer 
to pantomime than language, though, and are easily understood 
by both human and gorilla observers.62 Similarly, Michael Toma-
sello and his colleagues identified 30 gestures made by free-ranging  
chimpanzees at the Leipzig Zoo.63 These gestures by no means ex-
hausted the total repertoire of the animals, but were chosen be-
cause they could be readily observed and tabulated by the experi-
menters. These ape gestures, although unitary, are nevertheless 
somewhat language-like in that they are typically directed toward 
another individual, whereas animal calls tend to be directed to the 
community at large.
The manual gestures of chimpanzees and bonobos also differ 
from their facial movements and vocalizations in that they are less 
tied to typical contexts, such as play, grooming, or sex. They also 
show more variability between the two species and between sub-
groups within each species.64 These features imply that manual 
gestures are used more freely and flexibly than are vocalizations, 
again suggesting that they are deployed intentionally, whereas vo-
calizations are largely under emotional control—on automatic pi-
lot, as it were.
Michael Tomasello and his colleagues have also studied com-
municative bodily gestures made by great apes in the wild, and 
shown that these gestures are both subject to social learning and 

Do Animals Have Language?   51
sensitive to the attentional state of the receiver.65 These are both 
prerequisites for language—although they are not sufficient, as we 
shall see in chapter 9. In these studies gestures are defined as com-
municative movements of the head, limbs, or body, but exclude 
vocalizations. Some gestures, though, seem designed to produce 
sound—these include clapping and chest-beating. The gorilla ap-
pears to have a greater repertoire than the chimpanzee or bonobo, 
perhaps because the gorilla is the most terrestrial of the three, with 
arms less occupied with climbing and clinging. 
But although ape gestures are clearly communicative and inten-
tional, and subject to learning, they do not have the combinatorial 
generativity of human language. There are no sentences. Just what 
is missing from these gestures to enable them to develop into lan-
guage is further explored in chapter 9.
Recursion in Nonhuman Species
Over 40 years ago, the distinguished linguist Noam Chomsky re-
marked that human language was “based on an entirely different 
principle” than all other forms of animal communication.66 That 
conclusion seems much less true than it did then, and Chomsky 
himself appears to have softened his view. In an influential arti-
cle he coauthored with Mark Hauser and Tecumseh Fitch, two 
definitions of the language faculty are proposed. The faculty of 
language in the broad sense (FLB) includes a great many features 
shared between humans and other species, including input-output 
systems, and what they call the “conceptual-intentional system,” 
implying purposeful intention to communicate with others.67 Con-
tained within this system is the faculty of language in the narrow 
sense (FLN), which is in effect the I-language discussed in the pre-
vious chapter.68 As we saw there, Chomsky argued that I-language 
emerged in a single step in late human evolution, and was thus 
clearly denied to nonhuman apes.
Hauser, Chomsky, and Fitch note that “all approaches [to lan-
guage] agree that a core property of FLN is recursion.”69 In Chom-
sky’s most recent Miminalist Program, it is the Merge operation 

52   chapter 3
that is applied recursively, as we saw in the previous chapter. Since 
Hauser and coauthors identified recursion as the critical compo-
nent, there has been at least one claim that recursive parsing can 
be accomplished, not by apes, but by starlings.70 It is worth taking 
a closer look, because any such claim poses a real challenge to our 
supposed uniqueness.
The claim was based on the parsing of center-embedded se-
quences, in which pairs of elements are progressively embedded 
in other pairs. The elements comprised rattles and warbles, the 
natural sounds that starlings make, and each pair was made up of 
a particular rattle and a particular warble. There were eight exem-
plars of each, so that the actual pairs were randomly chosen. An 
example of a center-embedded series with three levels of embed-
ding would be R7R1R5R3W6W7W2W5—so that R3W6 is embedded 
in R5W7, and then this sequence is embedded in R1W2, and so on. 
Center-embedded sequences were compared with sequences made 
up of repeated pairs, as in R5W1R3W2R8W5R8W4. These structures 
are also shown in figure 6. After extensive training, the starlings 
were eventually able to discriminate both the center-embedded se-
quences and the repeated pairs from sequences not obeying these 
conditions.71 Since the actual examples of rattles and warbles were 
varied randomly from trial to trial, the birds could not have been 
learning specific sequences, but must have somehow grasped the 
different structures. 
Does that mean that the starling understood that the embedded 
sequence was made up of the recursive embedding of pairs within 
pairs? Alas no. The starlings might simply have been able to dis-
cern that the so-called embedded sequences comprised a sequence 
of rattles followed by an equal number of warbles. This does re-
quire the ability to estimate the number of each, at least up to 
four, and then judge whether the two numbers were the same. This  
structure is also shown in figure 6. To adopt this alternative strat-
egy, they need some ability to count, or at least estimate num-
ber—birds are pretty good at that72—and some ability to judge 
whether two quantities are equal. They don’t actually have to be 
terribly good at this, since their performance, although better than 
chance, was not perfect. 

Do Animals Have Language?   53
It seems likely, then, that the starlings cleverly discovered a sim-
pler solution to the problem set them, one that did not involve the 
understanding of recursion.73 We might nevertheless be advised to 
pay more heed to the songs of starlings, perhaps following the lead 
of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. The final movement of his Piano 
Concerto in G Major is said to have been based on a song by his  
pet starling. More seriously, the foregoing example illustrates that 
the concept of recursion can be elusive, and one can be misled into 
thinking that a sequence that was constructed from recursive em-
bedding is necessarily decomposed in the same manner. 
If starlings were genuinely able to parse three levels of center-
embedding, this would be deeply embarrassing for humans, who 
are pretty much incapable of understanding recursion at this level 
of complexity. For example, we can understand a single level of 
center-embedding, as in John, whom Emily loves, adores Jane, 
and at a pinch we can add another level, as in John, whom Em-
ily, whom Tom loves, loves, adores Jane. But try adding another 
level: John, whom Emily, whom Tom, whom Caroline loves, loves, 
loves, adores Jane. That’s not just an eternal triangle, it’s an eternal  
tetrahedron. 
For the present, then, we may safely conclude that there is no 
evidence for recursive parsing of sequences in nonhuman species. 
In language, at least, recursion may indeed be uniquely human, 
as Chomsky and others have maintained. Nevertheless we saw in  
R
R
R
R
W W W W
R
R
R
R
W W W W
R W R W
R W R W
B
C
A
Figure 6. Sequences of rattles (R) and warbles (W) played to starlings.  
A = repeated pairs; B = embedded pairs, C = alternative parsing that may have 
allowed the starlings to distinguish B without appealing to recursive embedding.

54   chapter 3
the previous chapter that some human languages may not involve 
recursion, although that too may depend on how recursion is 
defined. In later chapters, though, I argue that human language 
would not have been possible were it not for the recursive nature 
of human thought. 
I consider next the general question of how human language 
evolved.

4
How Language Evolved from  
Hand to Mouth
A tongue is a tongue
And a lung is a lung
In a tale you can shout or sing
Without the gesture? Nothing!
—from “Gesticulate” in the 1953 musical Kismet
The 1866 ban by the Linguistic Society of Paris on all discussions 
of the evolution of language seems to have had a prolonged effect. 
The main difficulty, it seems, was (and to some extent still is) the 
widespread belief that language is uniquely human, so that there 
is no evidence to be gained from the study of nonhuman animals. 
This meant that language must have evolved some time since the 
split of the hominins from the great apes. In the nineteenth century, 
at least, there was little to be gleaned from fossil evidence, and any 
theory on how language evolved was largely a matter of specula-
tion—and no doubt argument. Of course evolution was itself con-
tentious, and was vigorously attacked by the church. In the case 
of language, the conflict between science and religion would have 
been exacerbated by the long-standing view that language was a 
gift from God. 
Noam Chomsky’s view of language, summarized in chapter 2,  
also leads to a somewhat miraculous view of how language evolved. 
The basis for all language, he proposes, is I-language, or the lan-
guage of thought. Since I-language has no external referents, and 
must precede the evolution of E-languages—the languages we ac-
tually speak or sign—it cannot have arisen through natural selec-
tion. It must therefore have emerged as a singular event, in a single 

56   chapter 4
individual. In chapter 2, we were introduced to this individual as 
Prometheus. Chomsky also remarks, “Roughly 100,000+ years 
ago . . . there were no languages,”1 which suggests that Prometheus 
lived after the actual emergence of our species, presumably in  
Africa.
The view that language emerged de novo in Homo sapiens has 
been elaborated by others, and is sometimes called the “big bang” 
theory. Derek Bickerton once wrote that “true language, via the 
emergence of syntax, was a catastrophic event, occurring within 
the first few generations of Homo sapiens sapiens.”2 The idea that 
language emerged very recently is based in part on the view that 
so-called modern human behavior, as inferred from the archaeo­
logical record and presumed to include language, arose within the  
past 100,000 years, and perhaps as recently as 50,000 years ago. 
Richard Klein, for example, writes that it becomes “at least plau-
sible to tie the basic behavioral shift at 50 ka to a fortuitous mu-
tation that created the fully modern brain.”3 Timothy Crow has 
proposed that a genetic mutation gave rise to the speciation of 
Homo sapiens, along with such uniquely human attributes as lan-
guage, cerebral asymmetry, theory of mind, and a vulnerability to 
psychosis.4 That was some bang.
From a Darwinian perspective this view is deeply implausible. 
Steven Pinker and Paul Bloom were perhaps the first to question 
the idea that language emerged in a singular event. Language, they 
observed, is complex, and “The only successful account of the ori-
gin of complex biological structure is the theory of natural selec-
tion, the view that the differential reproductive success associated 
with heritable variation is the primary organizing force in the evo-
lution of organisms.”5 They go on to point out that the emergence 
of complex structure through natural selection is gradual: “The 
only way for complex design to evolve is through a sequence of 
mutations with small effects.”6  On a priori grounds, then, it seems 
highly unlikely that language was the product of a single mutation 
in some lone Prometheus.
As we saw in the previous chapter, there is still general agree-
ment that the critical ingredient distinguishing most human lan-
guages from other forms of animal communication is recursive 

from Hand to Mouth   57
grammar. Even this ingredient need not have appeared suddenly 
and fully formed in our own species, and indeed, as we saw in 
chapter 2, there may be languages such as that of the Pirahã that 
do not make use of recursion. The concept of grammaticalization, 
also discussed in chapter 2, suggests scenarios in which grammar 
unfolds gradually, rather than in a single step. Instead of supposing 
that it all happened within the past 100,000 years, it seems much 
more reasonable to suppose that grammatical language evolved 
slowly—and variably—over the six or seven million years since 
the hominins parted company with the chimpanzee line, although 
I suggest below that it was probably the last two million years 
that were critical. This must still be regarded as something of a 
big bang in evolutionary terms, but does give the theorist more 
breathing space to develop a plausible evolutionary scenario. But 
of course at least some of the other ingredients of language were  
no doubt present in our primate forebears, and to understand how 
language evolved we need to reach back in time to these forebears, 
then forward to hominin evolution, and then try to determine what 
gave language its power of limitless expression. 
In the previous chapter, I showed that the nearest equivalents of 
language in nonhuman primates lie in manual systems rather than 
in vocal calls. Manual activity in primates is intentional and subject 
to learning, whereas vocalizations appear to be largely involuntary 
and fixed.7 In teaching great apes to speak, much greater success 
has been achieved through gesture and the use of keyboards than 
through vocalization, and the bodily gestures of apes in the wild 
are less constrained by context than are their vocalizations. These 
observations strongly suggest that language evolved from manual 
gestures.
The Gestural Origins of Language
The theory that language evolved from manual gestures has a 
long but checkered history. An early advocate was the eighteenth- 
century French philosopher Abbé Étienne Bonnot de Condillac. 
He was interested in how language evolved, but as a priest was on 

58   chapter 4
dangerous ground, since the theological view was that language 
was a gift from God. In order to express his own heretical view 
he therefore had to present it as a fable.8 He imagined two aban-
doned children, a boy and a girl, who had not yet acquired lan-
guage and were wandering about in the desert after the Flood. 
In order to communicate they used manual gestures. If the boy 
wanted something out of his reach, “He did not confine himself 
to cries or sounds only; he used some endeavors to obtain it, he 
moved his head, his arms, and every part of his body.” These move-
ments were understood by his companion, who was then able to 
help. Eventually there grew “a language which in its infancy, prob-
ably consisted only in contortions and violent agitations, being 
thus proportioned to the slender capacity of this young couple.”9
The story goes on to explain how articulated sounds came to be 
associated with gestures, but “the organ of speech was so inflexible 
that it could not articulate any other than a few simple sounds.”10 
Eventually, though, the capacity to vocalize increased, and “ap-
peared as convenient as the mode of speaking by action; they were 
both indiscriminately used; till at length articulate sounds became 
so easy, that they absolutely prevailed.”11
On the surface, at least, this story is not about the evolution of 
language, but is rather about how two stranded children devel-
oped a way of communicating. It is likely, though, that Condillac 
really intended it to be the story of how language evolved as a hu-
man faculty, and it was remarkably prescient. 
The idea that language evolved from manual gestures has since 
been proposed many times, although not always accepted. Condil-
lac’s near contemporary, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, evidently unfazed 
by religious prohibitions, endorsed the gestural theory more openly 
in an essay published in 1782. Charles Darwin at least pointed (as 
it were) to it: “I cannot doubt that language owes its origins to the 
imitation and modification of various natural sounds, and man’s 
own distinctive cries, aided by signs and gestures.”12 In 1900, Wil­
helm Wundt, the founder of the first laboratory of experimental  
psychology at Leipzig in 1879, wrote a two-volume work on speech,  
and argued that a universal sign language was the origin of all 
languages.13 He wrote, though, under the misapprehension that all 

from Hand to Mouth   59
deaf communities use the same system of signing, and that signed 
languages are useful only for basic communication, and are inca-
pable of communicating abstract ideas. We now know that signed 
languages vary widely from community to community, and can 
have all of the communicative sophistication of speech. 
The British neurologist MacDonald Critchley lamented that his 
book The Language of Gesture coincided with the outbreak of 
World War II and was therefore largely ignored, so he wrote a sec­
ond book called Silent Language, which was published in 1975. 
“Gesture,” he wrote, “is full of eloquence to the sagacious and 
vigilant onlooker who, holding the key to its interpretation, knows 
how and what to observe.”14 Critchley was ambivalent about 
whether language originated in gesture, being at one point unable 
to accept that language could have been at one time gestural and 
voiceless, but later arguing that gesture must have predated speech 
in human evolution. 
Perhaps the first comprehensive case for the gestural theory of 
language origins in modern times was presented by the anthro-
pologist Gordon W. Hewes in an article published in 1973. Hewes 
was partly motivated by the discovery that great apes could not be 
taught to speak, but were reasonably successful at using signs to 
communicate. The gestural theory was strengthened by the work of 
Ursula Bellugi and Edward S. Klima, revealing American Sign Lan-
guage (ASL) to be a full language, affected by specific brain injury 
in very much the same way that spoken language is.15 The gestural 
theory then seemed to lie dormant for a while. I picked it up in 
my 1991 book The Lopsided Ape, which was shortly followed by 
the 1994 book Gesture and the Nature of Language, by William  
C. Stokoe, David F. Armstrong, and Sherman E. Wilcox, who ap-
proached it from the perspective of signed languages. This was fol-
lowed by Armstrong’s book Original Signs in 1999. I elaborated 
my own views in my 2002 book, From Hand to Mouth, and in the 
previous year William C. Stokoe published Language in Hand, with 
the self-explanatory subtitle Why Sign Came before Speech.16
The gestural theory received a powerful boost, though, with the 
remarkable discovery of so-called mirror neurons in the primate 
brain. 

60   chapter 4
Mirror Neurons
In 2000, the neuroscientist Vilayanur Ramachandran famously re-
marked that mirror neurons would do for psychology what DNA 
has done for biology17—a remark that is in danger of being quoted 
almost as often as mirror neurons themselves are invoked. Mir-
ror neurons were discovered in the monkey brain by the Italian 
scientist Giacomo Rizzolatti and his colleagues at the University of 
Parma. The activity of these neurons was recorded from electrodes 
inserted into a part of the frontal cortex called area F5. They form 
a subset of a class of neurons that are active when the monkey 
makes an intentional movement of the hand, such as reaching to 
grasp an object, like a peanut. To Rizzolatti’s initial surprise, some 
of these neurons also responded when the monkey observed an-
other individual (such as the researcher) making the same move-
ment. These are the neurons dubbed “mirror neurons,” because 
perception is mirrored in action. They have also been called “mon-
key see, monkey do” neurons. 
The idea that mirror neurons may have set the stage for the 
eventual evolution of language was first set out by Michael Arbib 
and Giacomo Rizzolatti.18 The main points are as follows.
First, area F5 is homologous to an area in the human brain 
known as Broca’s area, which plays a critical role in speech and 
language. More precisely, Broca’s area can be divided into two ar-
eas, known as Brodman areas 44 and 45, and area 44 is considered 
the true analogue of area F5. In humans, it is now evident that area 
44 is involved not only in speech, but also in motor functions un-
related to speech, including complex hand movements, and senso-
rimotor learning and integration.19 In the course of human evolu-
tion, then, it seems that vocalization must have been incorporated 
into the system, which explains why language can be either vocal, 
as in speech, or manual, as in signed languages.20
Second, mirror neurons are now understood to be part of a larger 
network, called the mirror system. In the monkey it includes, be-
sides area F5, more posterior areas such as the superior temporal 
sulcus and the inferior parietal lobule.21 This system largely over-

from Hand to Mouth   61
laps the corresponding regions in the human brain that have to 
do with the more general functions of language. Besides Broca’s 
area, these regions include the other well-known language area, 
Wernicke’s area, in the posterior part of the superior temporal sul-
cus, although language areas are probably distributed more widely 
than these two classic areas.22 The overlap has led to the notion 
that language grew out of the mirror system itself, an idea devel-
oped in some detail by Michael Arbib.23
Third, Rizzolatti and colleagues proposed that the mirror sys-
tem in the monkey is in essence a system for understanding action. 
That is, the monkey understands the actions of others in terms of 
how it would itself perform those actions. This is the basic idea 
underlying what has been called the motor theory of speech per-
ception, which holds that we perceive speech, not in terms of the 
acoustic patterns it creates, but in terms of how we ourselves would 
articulate it. This theory arose from the work the Alvin Liber-
man and others at the Haskins Laboratories in the United States, 
who sought the acoustic principles underlying the basic units of 
sound that make up our speech.24 For example, b sounds in words 
like battle, bottle, beer, bug, rabbit, Beelzebub, or flibbertigibbet 
Broca’s Area
Motor Cortex
Site of Mirror Neurons
Motor Cortex
Human Brain
Macaque Monkey Brain
Figure 7. Sites of Broca’s area and motor cortex in the human brain (left), and 
of mirror neurons and motor cortex in the macaque brain (right). Copyright  
© 2010 W. Tecumseh Fitch. Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge  
University Press.

62   chapter 4
probably sound much the same to you, but the actual acoustic 
streams created by these b sounds varies widely, to the point that 
they actually have virtually nothing in common.25 The same is true 
of other speech sounds, especially the plosive sounds d, g, p, t, and 
k; the acoustic signals vary widely depending on the contexts in 
which they are embedded. Liberman and colleagues concluded that 
we hear each sound as the same in each case because we “hear” it 
in terms of how we produce it.
Fourth, we saw in the previous chapter that vocalization in pri-
mates seems to be largely involuntary and, for the most part at least, 
impervious to learning. The mirror system, in contrast to the primate 
vocalization system, has to do with intentional action, and is clearly 
modifiable through experience. For example, mirror neurons in 
the monkey brain respond to the sounds of certain actions, such as 
the tearing of paper or the cracking of nuts,26 and these responses 
can only have been learned. The neurons were not activated, 
though, by monkey calls, suggesting that vocalization itself is not 
part of the mirror system in monkeys. In our forebears, then, the 
mirror system was already set up for processing the sounds caused 
by manual activity, but not for the processing of vocal sounds. 
Of course, nonhuman primates do not have language as we 
know it, but the mirror system provided a natural platform for lan-
guage to evolve. Indeed the mirror system is now well documented 
in humans, and involves characteristics that are more language- 
like than those in the monkey. For example, in the monkey, mir-
ror neurons respond to transitive acts, as in reaching for an actual 
object, but do not respond to intransitive acts, where a movement 
is mimed and involves no object.27 In humans, in contrast, the mir-
ror system responds to both transitive and intransitive acts, and 
the incorporation of intransitive acts would have paved the way 
to the understanding of acts that are symbolic rather than object-
related.28 More directly, though, functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) in humans shows that the mirror-neuron region 
of the premotor cortex is activated not only when they watch 
movements of the foot, hand, and mouth, but also when they read 
phrases pertaining to these movements.29 Somewhere along the 
line, the mirror system became interested in language.

from Hand to Mouth   63
An Evolutionary Scenario
Let us suppose, then, that intentional communication grew out 
of action understanding in our primate forebears. In the previous 
chapter, we saw that a number of great apes have learned language- 
like gestures, suggesting that the incorporation of intransitive ges-
ture had already occurred in our great-ape forebears. These ges-
tures lack grammar, and are therefore not true language, but it 
is reasonable to suppose that similar activity was a precursor to 
language in our hominin forebears who separated from the line 
leading to chimpanzees and bonobos some six or seven million 
years ago. 
Unlike their great-ape cousins, the hominins were bipedal, which 
would have freed the hands for the further development of expres-
sive manual communication. The body and hands are free to move 
in four dimensions (three of space and one of time), and so mimic 
activity in the external world. The hands can also assume, at least 
approximately, the shapes of objects or animals, and the fingers 
can mimic the movement of legs and arms. The movements of the 
hands can also mimic the movement of objects through space, and 
facial expressions can convey something of the emotions of events 
being described. Mimesis persists in dance, ballet, and mime, and 
we all resort to mime when trying to communicate with people 
who speak a language different from our own. Once, in Russia, I 
was able to successfully request a bottle opener by miming the ac-
tion of opening a beer bottle, to the vast amusement of the people 
at the hotel desk.
Although predominantly bipedal, the early hominins were still 
partially adapted to arboreal life, and walked only clumsily on two 
legs. This is known as facultative bipedalism. Merlin Donald, in 
his 1991 book Origins of the Human Mind, suggested that what 
he called “mimetic culture” did not evolve until the emergence of 
Homo ergaster from around two million years ago. In Ergaster and 
the later members of the genus Homo, moreover, bipedalism shifted 
from facultative to obligate—that is, it became obligatory, and as-
sumed a more free-striding gait. More critically, perhaps, brain size 

64   chapter 4
began to increase dramatically with the emergence of the genus 
Homo, which might be taken as evidence of selection for more 
complex communication, and perhaps the beginnings of grammar.
Even in modern humans, mimed action activates the brain cir-
cuits normally thought of as dedicated to language. In one exper­
iment, for example, brain activity was recorded while people 
attended to video clips of a person performing pantomimes of ac-
tions, such as threading a needle, or what are called emblems, such 
as lifting a finger to the lips to indicate quiet. Activity was also 
recorded while the subjects gave spoken descriptions of these ac-
tions. All three activities elicited activity in the left side of the brain 
in frontal and posterior areas—including Broca’s and Wernicke’s 
areas—that have been identified since the nineteenth century as the 
core of the language system. The authors of this study conclude 
that these areas have to do, not just with language, but with the 
more general linking of symbols to meaning, whether the symbols 
are words, gestures, images, sounds, or objects.30 
We also know that the use of signed language in the profoundly 
deaf activates the same brain areas that are activated by speech,31 
and indeed modern sign languages are also partly dependent on 
mime. It has been estimated, for example, that in Italian Sign 
Language some 50 percent of the hand signs and 67 percent of 
the bodily locations of signs stem from iconic representations, in 
which there is a degree of spatiotemporal mapping between the 
sign and its meaning.32 In American Sign Language, too, some signs 
are arbitrary, but many more are iconic. For example, the sign for 
erase resembles the action of erasing a blackboard, and the sign for 
play piano mimics the action of actually playing a piano.33 But of 
course signs need not be transparently iconic, and the meanings of 
even iconic symbols often cannot be guessed by naïve observers, 
or even by those using a different sign language.34 They also tend 
to become less iconic and more arbitrary over time, in the interests 
of speed, efficiency, and grammatical constraints. This process is 
known as conventionalization.35 
The Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure wrote of the “arbitrari-
ness of the sign” as a defining property of language,36 and on this 
basis it is sometimes supposed that signed languages, with their 

from Hand to Mouth   65
strong basis in iconic representations, are not true languages. Al-
though most words in spoken languages are indeed arbitrary—the 
words cat and dog in no way resemble those friendly animals or 
the sounds that they make—there are of course some words that 
are onomatopoeic. One such word is zanzara, which is the evoca-
tive Italian word for mosquito, and Steven Pinker notes a num-
ber of newly minted examples: oink, tinkle, barf, conk, woofer, 
tweeter.37 We should perhaps add twitter. Speech can also mimic 
visual properties in subtle ways; for example, it has been shown 
that speakers tend to raise the pitch of their voice when describing 
an object moving upwards, and lower it in describing a downward 
movement.38 The arbitrariness of words (or morphemes) is not so 
much a necessary property of language, though, as a matter of ex­
pedience, and of the constraints imposed by the particular lan-
guage medium.
Speech, for example, requires that the information be linear-
ized, piped into a sequence of sounds that are necessarily limited 
in terms of how they can capture the spatial and physical natures  
of what they represent. The linguist Charles Hockett put it this 
way:
American
sign language
Chinese
sign language
Danish
sign language
Figure 8. Signs for TREE in different sign languages. Although all are funda-
mentally iconic, they differ markedly. Iconic representations are not always 
transparent to the viewer not conversant with the language (author’s drawing).

66   chapter 4
When a representation of some four-dimensional hunk of life has to 
be compressed into the single dimension of speech, most iconicity is 
necessarily squeezed out. In one-dimensional projections, an elephant 
is indistinguishable from a woodshed. Speech perforce is largely arbi-
trary; if we speakers take pride in that, it is because in 50,000 years or 
so of talking we have learned to make a virtue of necessity.39
Signed languages are clearly less constrained. The hands and arms 
can mimic the shapes of real-world objects and actions, and to 
some extent lexical information can be delivered in parallel instead 
of being forced into rigid temporal sequence. With the hands, it is 
almost certainly possible to distinguish an elephant from a wood-
shed, in purely visual terms. Even so, conventionalization allows 
signs to be simplified and speeded up, to the point that many of 
them lose most or all of their iconic aspect. For example, in Ameri-
can Sign Language the sign for home was once a combination of the 
sign for eat, which is a bunched hand touching the mouth, and the 
sign for sleep, which is a flat hand on the cheek. Now it consists of 
two quick touches on the cheek, both with a bunched handshape, 
so the original iconic components are effectively lost.40
Although signing has been recorded from as early as 360 BC,41 
modern signed languages have short pedigrees, arising indepen-
dently among different deaf communities. This somewhat contami­
nates the comparison between signed and spoken languages, which  
have evolved, albeit with modification and divergence, over tens 
of thousands of years. One interesting exception is Turkish Sign 
Language, which has highly schematized morphology and an ex-
ceptionally large proportion of arbitrary, noniconic signs.42 Turk-
ish Sign Language may go back over 500 years. Visitors to the 
Ottoman court in the sixteenth century observed that mute ser-
vants, most of them deaf, were favored in the court, probably be-
cause they could not be bribed for court secrets. These servants 
developed a sign language, which was also acquired by many of 
the courtiers. A photograph published in 1917 shows two servants 
still using sign language. It is not known for sure whether modern 
Turkish Sign Language is related to that of the Ottoman court, but 
if it is, it supports the view that the passage of time is the critical 
element in the loss of iconic representation.43

from Hand to Mouth   67
Language, then, may have evolved from mime, with the arbitrary 
nature of some words or signs deriving from the drive to greater 
economy and from the constraints of the medium through which 
language is expressed. Conventionalization of course depends on 
the power of the brain to form associations, since the iconic or ono­
matopoeic component that may serve to indicate meaning is ef-
fectively lost. We know from the studies of Kanzi and the other 
“linguistic apes” that the ability to form such associations is not 
unique to humans, although the human capacity to do so may far 
outstretch that of the ape. Kanzi has learned a few hundred sym-
bols, but the average literate human has a vocabulary on the order 
of 50,000 words, most of them neither iconic nor onomatopoeic.44 
This may be one reason why the human brain is some three times 
larger relative to body size than that of the great apes.45 We simply 
need a much larger dictionary. 
Once conventionalization sets in, there is no reason why lan-
guage need be restricted to the visual domain. Spoken words will 
do as well as signed ones. But this of course raises the question of 
why language switched, at least in the majority of humans, from 
manual gesture to speech.
The Switch
This indeed has proven to be the most contentious issue for the 
gestural theory. The linguist Robbins Burling, for example, writes
[T]he gestural theory has one nearly fatal flaw. Its sticking point has 
always been the switch that would have been needed to move from a 
visual language to an audible one.46
In another recent book, Peter F. MacNeilage expresses similar con-
cerns,47 but I will argue that the switch was probably a relatively 
simple and natural one.
The first step from manual gesture to speech may have been 
the incorporation of facial gestures. Even in the monkey, manual 
and facial gestures are closely linked neurophysiologically, as well 
as behaviorally.48 Some neurons in area F5 fire when the animal 
makes movements to grasp an object with either the hand or the 

68   chapter 4
mouth. An area in the monkey brain that is considered homolo-
gous to Broca’s area is involved in control of the orofacial muscu-
lature—though not of speech itself.49 These neural links between 
hand and mouth may be related to eating rather than communica-
tion, perhaps involved in preparing the mouth to hold an object 
after the hand has grasped it, but later adapted for gestural and 
finally vocal language. 
The connection between hand and mouth can also be demon­
strated in human behavior. In one experiment, people were in­
struc­ted to open their mouths while grasping objects with their  
hands, and the size of the mouth opening increased with the size of 
the grasped object. Conversely, when they open their hands while 
grasping objects with their mouths, the size of the hand opening 
also increased with the size of the object.50 Grasping movements of 
the hand also affect the way we utter sounds. If people are asked to 
say ba while grasping an object, or even while watching someone 
else grasping an object, the syllable itself is affected by the size of 
the object grasped. The larger the object, the wider the opening 
of the mouth, with consequent effects on the speech formants.51 
These effects can also be observed in one-year-old infants.52 
The link between hand and mouth suggests that early communi-
cative gestures may have involved facial gestures as well as gestures 
of the hands. Indeed, speech itself retains a strong visual compo-
nent. This is illustrated by an effect attributed to the psychologist 
Harry McGurk,53 in which dubbing sounds onto a mouth that is 
saying something different alters what the hearer actually hears; 
that is, the viewer/listener often reports what the speaker is seen to 
be saying rather than the speech sound itself, or sometimes a blend 
of the two. Deaf people often become highly proficient at lip- 
reading, and even in individuals with normal hearing the brain 
areas involved in speech production are activated when they view 
speech-related lip movements.54 Ventriloquists project their own 
voices onto the face of a dummy by synchronizing the mouth move-
ments of the dummy with their own pursed-lipped utterances. 
The signed languages of the deaf also depend at least as much 
on movements of the face as of the hands. Facial expressions and 
head movements can alter the mood or polarity of a sentence. For 

from Hand to Mouth   69
example, a question in American Sign Language is signaled by rais-
ing the eyebrows, and shaking the head while signing a sentence 
turns it from affirmative to negative. Movements of the mouth are 
especially important, to the point that linguists are beginning to 
identify the rules that govern the formation of mouthed signs.55 
Mouth gestures can also serve to disambiguate hand gestures, and 
as part of more general facial gestures provide the visual equiv­
alent of prosody in speech.56 Recordings of eye movements show 
that users of British Sign Language watch the face more often than 
they watch the hands or body when watching a person signing a 
story.57
The first part of the switch, then, was probably the increasing in-
volvement of the face. The idea that movements of the face played 
a role in the evolution of language was anticipated by Friedrich 
Nietzsche in his 1878 book Human, All Too Human. Aphorism 
216 from that book reads in part as follows;
Imitation of gesture is older than language, and goes on involuntarily 
even now, when the language of gesture is universally suppressed, and 
the educated are taught to control their muscles. The imitation of ges-
ture is so strong that we cannot watch a face in movement without the 
innervation of our own face (one can observe that feigned yawning 
will evoke natural yawning in the man who observes it). The imitated 
gesture led the imitator back to the sensation expressed by the gesture 
in the body or face of the one being imitated. This is how we learned to 
understand one another; this is how the child still learns to understand 
its mother. In general, painful sensations were probably also expressed 
by a gesture that in its turn caused pain (for example, tearing the hair, 
beating the breast, violent distortion and tensing of the facial muscles). 
Conversely, gestures of pleasure were themselves pleasurable and were 
therefore easily suited to the communication of understanding (laugh-
ing as a sign of being tickled, which is pleasurable, then served to ex-
press other pleasurable sensations).
As soon as men understood each other in gesture, a symbolism of 
gesture could evolve. I mean, one could agree on a language of tonal 
signs, in such a way that at first both tone and gesture (which were 
joined by tone symbolically) were produced, and later only the tone.

70   chapter 4
This remarkable extract also anticipates the discovery of the mir-
ror system.
The final act, then, was the incorporation of vocalization. Part 
of the reason for this may have been that facial gestures increas-
ingly involved movements of the tongue that are invisible, and ac-
tivation of the vocal cords simply allowed these invisible gestures 
to be accessible. Speech might be described as facial gesture half 
swallowed, with sound added. Along with the incorporation of vo-
cal sound, the vocal tract itself changed, and control of the tongue 
was enhanced, enabling a wider diversity of sounds. The sound 
itself could be turned on or off to create the distinction between 
voiced sounds, such as the consonants /b/, /d/, and /g/, and their 
unvoiced equivalents, /p/, /t/, and /k/.
Speech itself can be viewed as gestural rather than acoustic.58 
The motor theory of speech perception, described above, is based 
on the idea that perceiving speech sounds depends on the map-
ping of those sounds on to the articulatory gestures that produce 
them. This has led to what is known as articulatory phonology,59 
in which speech is understood as gestures produced by six articu-
latory organs, the lips, the velum, the larynx, and the blade, body, 
and root of the tongue. In the context of speech understood as 
gesture, then, the incorporation of vocal gestures into the mirror 
system may have been a relatively small step for mankind.
But how and when did it happen?
FOXP2
A possible clue comes from genetics. About half of the members of 
three generations of an extended family in England, known as the 
KE family, are affected by a disorder of speech and language. The 
disorder is evident from the affected child’s first attempts to speak 
and persists into adulthood.60 The disorder is now known to be 
due to a point mutation on the FOXP2 gene (forkhead box P2) on 
chromosome 7.61 For normal speech to be acquired, you need two 
functional copies of this gene.
The FOXP2 gene, then, may have played a role in incorporating 
vocalization into the mirror system, thus allowing speech to de-

from Hand to Mouth   71
velop as an intentional, learnable system.62 As we saw earlier, one 
of the main brain centers for the production of speech is Broca’s 
area, which is also part of the mirror system. Typically, Broca’s area 
is activated when people generate words. A brain-imaging study re-
vealed, though, that the members of the KE family affected by the 
mutation, unlike their unaffected relatives, showed no activation in 
Broca’s area while silently generating verbs.63 The FOXP2 gene may 
also play a role in other species. In songbirds, knockdown of the  
FOXP2 gene impairs the imitation of song,64 and insertion of the 
FOXP2 point mutation found in the KE family into the mouse 
critically alters synaptic plasticity and motor learning.65 On the 
other hand, insertion of the normal human variant of FOXP2 into 
the mouse gives rise to qualitatively different ultrasonic varia-
tions.66 The role of FOXP2 in foxes is unknown.
FOXP2 is highly conserved in mammals, and in humans the gene  
differs in only three places from that in the mouse. Nevertheless 
it underwent two mutations since the split between hominin and 
chimpanzee lines. According to one theoretical estimate, the more 
recent of these occurred “not more than” 100,000 years ago,67 al-
though the error associated with this estimate makes it not unrea-
sonable to suppose that it coincided with the emergence of Homo 
sapiens around 170,000 years ago. This conclusion is seemingly 
contradicted, though, by recent evidence that the mutation is also 
present in the DNA of a 45,000-year-old Neandertal fossil,68 sug-
gesting that it goes back at least 700,000 years to the common 
ancestor of humans and Neandertals.69 
But this is challenged in turn by a more recent phylogenetic dating 
of the haplotype, in which the time of the most recent common an-
cestor carrying the FOXP2 mutation was estimated at 42,000 years  
ago, with 95 percent confidence that it occurred between 38,000 
and 45,500 years ago.70 Even allowing for distortions in assump-
tions underlying this estimate, it is much more consistent with the 
earlier molecular-based estimate than with that based on the Ne-
andertal fossil. It is possible that the Neandertal DNA was con-
taminated, or that there was some degree of inbreeding between 
Neandertal and Homo sapiens, who overlapped in Europe for 
some 20,000 years. Recent evidence suggests that microcephalin, a 
gene involved in regulating brain size, may have entered the human  

72   chapter 4
gene pool through interbreeding with Neandertals,71 so the re-
verse possibility of FOXP2 entering the late Neandertal gene pool 
from Homo sapiens is not completely ruled out. We might have 
been slightly chummier with the Neandertals than is generally 
thought.72 
It may well be that the FOXP2 gene holds the secret of the emer-
gence of speech. It may nevertheless be a chimera, since it is known 
to be involved in a wide range of areas, not only in the brain, but 
also in the heart, lung, and gut.73 Moreover, the mutated gene in 
the KE family is not the same as that in the last common ancestor 
of chimpanzee and human. Even so, it continues to attract interest 
as a likely clue to how speech evolved.74
Anatomical Changes
Be that as it may, there is other evidence that the final touches mak­
ing autonomous speech possible may not have been complete in the 
Neandertal. One requirement for articulate speech was the lower-
ing of the larynx, creating a right-angled vocal tract that allows 
us to produce the wide range of vowels that characterize speech. 
Philip Lieberman has argued that this modification was incomplete 
even in the Neandertals, a species of Homo with brains as large 
as those of Homo sapiens75—slightly larger, in fact, but let’s not 
go there. We share a common ancestry with the Neandertals go-
ing back some 700,000 years, but parted company some 370,000 
years ago before again sharing territory in Europe from around 
50,000 years ago.76 The Neandertals were driven to extinction 
around 30,000 years ago, suggesting that we humans may have 
talked them out of existence—perhaps a more palatable notion, as  
it were, than that we simply slaughtered them. 
Lieberman’s views on this are controversial.77 In direct contra-
diction, Tattersall writes that “a vocal tract had . . . been achieved 
among humans well over half a million years before we have any 
independent evidence that our forebears were using language or 
speaking.”78 The emergence of language, in Tattersall’s view as in 
Chomsky’s, was thus a later event, unrelated to the capacity for 
speech. Lieberman has nevertheless received support from his son 

from Hand to Mouth   73
Daniel Lieberman, who has shown that the structure of the cra-
nium underwent changes after we split with the Neandertals. One 
such change is the shortening of the sphenoid, the central bone of 
the cranial base from which the face grows forward, resulting in a 
flattened face.79 This flattening may have been part of the change 
that created the right-angled vocal tract, with horizontal and ver-
tical components of equal length.80 This is the modification that 
allowed us the full range of vowel sounds, from ah to oo. Another 
adaptation unique to H. sapiens is neurocranial globularity, de-
fined as the roundness of the cranial vault in the sagittal, coronal, 
and transverse planes,81 which is likely to have increased the rela-
tive size of the temporal and frontal lobes relative to other parts 
of the brain. 
Other anatomical evidence suggests that the anatomical require-
ments for fully articulate speech were probably not complete until 
late in the evolution of Homo. For example, the hypoglossal canal 
is much larger in humans than in great apes, suggesting that the 
hypoglossal nerve, which innervates the tongue, is also much larger 
in humans, perhaps reflecting the importance of tongued gestures 
in speech. The evidence suggests that the size of the hypoglossal ca-
nal in early australopithecines, and perhaps in Homo habilis, was 
within the range of that in modern great apes, while that of the 
Neandertal and early H. sapiens skulls was contained well within 
the modern human range,82 although this has been disputed.83 A 
further clue comes from the finding that the thoracic region of the  
spinal cord is relatively larger in humans than in nonhuman pri-
mates, probably because breathing during speech involves extra 
muscles of the thorax and abdomen. Fossil evidence indicates that 
this enlargement was not present in the early hominins or even in 
Homo ergaster, dating from about 1.6 million years ago, but was 
present in several Neandertal fossils.84
Emboldened by such evidence, and no doubt heartened by famil-
ial support, Philip Lieberman has recently made the radical claim 
that “fully human speech anatomy first appears in the fossil record 
in the Upper Paleolithic (about 50,000 years ago) and is absent in 
both Neandertals and earlier humans.”85 This provocative state-
ment suggests that articulate speech emerged even later than the  
arrival of Homo sapiens some 150,000 to 200,000 years ago. While  

74   chapter 4
this may be an extreme conclusion, the bulk of evidence does 
suggest that autonomous speech emerged very late in the human 
repertoire. Per­haps the critical question is whether the capacity to 
speak was unique to humans, or whether we shared it with the 
Neandertals. I return to this question in chapter 12.
Why the Switch?
It has become clear that the signed languages of the deaf have all 
of the linguistic sophistication of spoken languages. At Gallaudet 
University, in Washington, DC, instruction is entirely in American 
Sign Language, and includes all the usual academic disciplines, 
even poetry. In some respects, signed languages may have an ad-
vantage, since the greater iconic component can provide extra clues  
to meaning. 
This aside, then, the advantages of speech over manual language 
are likely to be practical rather than linguistic. Let’s consider what 
these advantages might be.
Spatial Reach
Sound reaches into areas inaccessible to sight. You can talk to a 
person who is hidden from sight, whereas signed language requires 
visual contact. This has the important advantage of allowing com-
munication at night, especially during the times when there was 
no artificial lighting, except perhaps for the campfire. The San, a 
modern hunter-gatherer society, are known to talk late at night, 
sometimes all through the night, to resolve conflict and share 
knowledge.86 Mary Kingsley, the noted British explorer of the late 
nineteenth century, made the following observation of tribes she 
encountered in Africa:
African languages [are not elaborate enough] to enable a native to state 
his exact thought. Some of them are very dependent upon gesture. When  
I was with the Fans they frequently said “We will go to the fire so that 
we can see what they say,” when any question had to be decided after 
dark, and the inhabitants of Fernando Po, the Bubis, are quite unable 

from Hand to Mouth   75
to converse with each other unless they have sufficient light to see the 
accompanying gestures of the conversation.87
While this may seem condescending, it may well be the case that 
some cultures make more use of gesture than others,88 through 
cultural rather than biological necessity.
Vocal language can carry over longer distances than signed lan-
guage, but its reach is not simply one of distance. You can talk 
to someone in the next room, or even while the person’s eyes are 
closed. Many an intelligent question after a talk has come from 
a member (usually elderly) of the audience who has appeared to 
be asleep throughout the talk. Signed language requires that the 
recipient is actually looking at the signer, whereas speech enters 
the ears regardless of how the listener is oriented or placed relative 
to the speaker. We speak of the line of sight, but the envelope of 
sound—and a three-dimensional envelope at that. Speech works 
over longer distances than signing, and can more readily command 
attention. You can wake a sleeping audience by shouting, but no 
amount of silent gesture will do the trick.
Speech gains these physical advantages with little cost compared 
to gesture. Teachers of sign language have been known to report 
needing regular massages in order to meet the sheer physical de-
mands of sign-language expression. In contrast, the physiological 
costs of speech are so low as to be nearly unmeasurable.89 In terms 
of expenditure of energy, speech adds little to the cost of breathing, 
which we must do anyway to sustain life.
Diversity and the Language Fortress
In chapter 2, I noted that there is huge diversity in the world’s lan­
guages, allowing language to serve as a badge of a culture’s distinc-
tiveness. There may also have been pressure to establish languages 
that were impenetrable to outsiders, thereby enhancing group 
membership and keeping out intruders and freeloaders. The ab-
sence of any iconic component in sound-based languages reduces 
penetrability, and the sheer diversity of possible sound-based sys-
tems adds further to the fortress-like nature of language. Although 
there are diverse sign languages, the diversity is almost certainly 

76   chapter 4
tiny compared with that possible in the deployment of speech 
sounds, even allowing for the fact that existing signed languages 
have a much shorter pedigree.
The impenetrability of speech is well illustrated by an anecdote 
from World War II. The outcome of the war in the Pacific hinged to 
a large extent on the ability of each side to crack codes developed 
by the other side. Early in the war, the Japanese were easily able to 
crack the codes developed by the allies, but the American military 
then developed a code that proved essentially impenetrable. They 
simply employed Navajo speakers to communicate openly in their 
own language via walkie-talkie. To the Japanese, Navajo simply 
sounded like a “strange, gurgling” sound, unrecognizable even as 
language.90 
Nicholas Evans asserts that there are well over 1,500 possible 
speech sounds, but no language uses more than 10 percent of them 
for its inventory of phonemes. As we have seen, phonemes do not 
map exactly onto actual sounds, but some measure of the variation 
in sounds used can be gained by comparing the number of pho-
nemes identified for different languages. The most parsimonious of 
languages appears to be that spoken by women of the Pirahã, the 
small hunter-gatherer Amazonian tribe in Brazil that we encoun-
tered in chapter 2. The Pirahã language as spoken by women has 
only seven consonants and three vowels.91 As though to compen-
sate for a male lack of verbal fluency, the men are permitted eight 
consonants and three vowels; with 11 phonemes, they tie with Ha-
waiian for the second most parsimonious language.92 New Zealand 
Maori has only 14 phonemes, but Maori are known for fine ora-
tory. In Maori society, as in other traditionally oral societies, speech 
implies power and status; the New Zealand scholar Anne Salmond 
writes that, among the Maori, “oratory is the prime qualification 
for entry into the power game.”93 The most phonologically diverse 
language may be !Xóõ, spoken by about 4,000 people in Botswana 
and Namibia, which has somewhere between 84 and 159 conso-
nants.94 English bumbles along with about 44 phonemes. 
Different languages, then, can in principle use inventories of 
sounds that are totally distinct, or very nearly so. Evans gives the 
example of the |Gui language of Botswana, which includes a large 

from Hand to Mouth   77
number of click sounds unpronounceable to those who don’t speak 
the language. Conversely, a Japanese colleague of Evans found the 
|Gui quite unable to pronounce her own name, which is Mimmi—
straightforward enough to speakers of Western languages. Even 
within Western languages, there are sounds in one language that 
speakers of other languages cannot produce. Japanese people have 
difficulty distinguishing between l- and r-sounds, creating difficul­
ties with words like parallel or Dylan Thomas’s Llareggub.95 Speak­
ers of English have comparable difficult distinguishing the differ-
ent t-sounds of Hindi, and I never could quite get the precise form 
of the French r-sound—aarrghh!
Paradoxically, none of the sounds used in speech poses a prob-
lem to children exposed from an early age. There is no reason to 
suppose a child born to a |Gui family but raised from birth in New  
York would have any difficulty learning to speak New York En­
glish, which to me sounds only slightly peculiar, and would no doubt  
eventually lose any ability to learn |Gui. On the other hand, Woody 
Allen would have easily learned |Gui had he been exposed to it 
from infancy. It has been claimed that very young infants can dis-
criminate between many, if not all, of the phonemes of the world’s 
languages,96 but by the age of about one they can discriminate 
only the phonemes of the language or languages they have been 
exposed to.
Little babies have the potential to crack the language barrier 
erected by different groups, but by the time we are adults, lan-
guage makes outsiders of us all.
Freeing the Hands
Charles Darwin wrote: “We might have used our fingers as efficient  
instruments [of communication], for a person with practice can 
report to a deaf man every word of a speech rapidly delivered at 
a public meeting; but the loss of our hands, while thus employed, 
would have been a serious inconvenience.”97 Darwin made this 
point to account for why we evolved speech rather than signed 
language, but the argument holds equally as an explanation for a 
switch from manual gesture to speech.

78   chapter 4
The switch, then, would have freed the hands for other activities, 
such as carrying and manufacture. It also allows people to speak 
and use tools at the same time. It might be regarded, in fact, as an 
early example of miniaturization, whereby gestures are squeezed 
from the upper body to the mouth. It also allows the development 
of pedagogy, enabling us to explain skilled actions while at the same 
time demonstrating them, as in a modern television cooking show.98 
The freeing of the hands and the parallel use of speech may have 
led to significant advances in technology,99 and help explain why 
humans eventually predominated over other large-brained homi-
nins, including the Neandertals, who died out some 30,000 years  
ago. I take up this theme in more detail in chapter 12, but suffice 
to say here that our newfound manual freedom may have been 
primarily responsible for the evolution of what anthropologists 
call “modernity,” which makes us so markedly different from all 
of our hominin cousins. 
And Still We Gesture
Of course there are also advantages to visual language over vo-
cal language. Vocal language is denied to those unable to hear or 
to speak, and signed languages form a natural substitute. Visual 
language still permits an iconic element, and most people resort to 
gesture, or drawing, when trying to communicate with those who 
speak a different language, or even when trying to explain spatial 
concepts, such as a spiral. Some sort of manual gesture is necessary 
even for the acquisition of speech; in learning the names of objects, 
for example, there must be some means of indicating which object 
has which name. Even adults gesture as they speak, and their ges-
tures can add a significant component of meaning.100 For example, 
people regularly point to indicate directions: He went that way . . . ,  
accompanied by pointing. Language has still not fully escaped its 
manual origins. Indeed, speech could scarcely exist without ges-
ture, some way to relate words to the physical world. As Ludwig 
Wittgenstein put it, “It isn’t the colour red that takes the place of 
the word red, but the gesture that points to a red object.”101

from Hand to Mouth   79
And of course what people do is often as eloquent as the things 
they say. In Shakespeare’s Henry VIII, Norfolk says this of Cardi-
nal Wolsey:
Some strange commotion
Is in his brain; he bites his lip and starts;
Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,
Then, lays his finger on his temple; Straight,
Springs out into a fast gait; then, stops again,
Strikes his breast hard; and anon, he casts
His eye against the moon: In most strange postures
We have seen him set himself.
In this chapter, we have come a long way from Prometheus, that 
solitary pioneer who suddenly found himself possessed of language. 
Even so, we have seen some evidence of late changes, perhaps re-
stricted to Homo sapiens, that gave rise to the power of speech. 
This may even have involved mutations, such as that of the FOXP2 
gene. But this does not mean of course that language emerged late. 
Along the way, though, as we progressed from manual gesture to 
speech, there is still one missing ingredient—grammar. How and 
when did language, whether spoken or signed, acquire its distinc-
tive property of generativity, the power to create a potentially in-
finite number of different sentences? For an answer to that, we 
need to digress first through two other recursive capacities argu-
ably unique to humans, episodic memory and mental time travel. 
We shall then find one likely source of grammatical language in the 
human ability to transcend time.


Part 2
Mental Time Travel
We humans can effortlessly transport ourselves mentally to other 
places and other times. We remember specific events, imagine pos-
sible future ones, and even invent fictional ones. Experimental 
psychologists have typically studied this power in the context of 
memory, asking people to imagine earlier events in their lives, or 
providing information and then asking people to recall it. More 
recently, though, the focus has shifted to the imagining of future 
events, revealing a continuity between so-called episodic memory 
and what has been termed episodic foresight. In both cases, there is 
a constructive element—even memory for specific episodes deviates  
substantially from what actually happened. Because of the con-
structive nature of both episodic foresight and episodic memory, 
mental time travel blends naturally into fiction.
Chapter 5 begins with memory, and especially so-called episodic 
memory, which involves the conscious reliving of past episodes. In 
chapter 6 I extend this focus to the more general notion of mental 
time travel, which includes the imagining of possible future epi-
sodes. In chapter 7 I develop the theme that mental time travel is 
critical to language. Indeed one of the so-called design features of 
language, as specified by the American linguist Charles Hockett, 
is displacement—the capacity to refer to events removed from the 
here and now.1 Language may therefore have evolved primarily to 
enable humans to share their memories, plans, and stories, enhanc-
ing social cohesion and creating a common culture. At the same 
time, the very mechanisms that create cohesion within groups can 
instill antagonisms between them—as the American writer and 
civil rights activist James Arthur Baldwin once put it, “People are 
trapped in history, and history is trapped in them.” 

This section heralds a departure from the conventional view of  
language as an independent biological capacity, and suggests in-
stead that language is deeply bound to culture. The “language for-
tress” describe in chapter 4 is part of the cultural fortress that we 
humans have created.
82   part 1

5
Reliving the Past
I have been through some terrible things in my life, some of which  
actually happened.
—Mark Twain
In Hidden Lives, a memoir of her family, the British novelist Mar-
garet Forster describes herself in the first five years of her life in the 
third person. From the age of five, however, she switches to the first 
person. She explains the switch as follows:
It was at this time, in 1943, when I was five, that my own real memory 
begins, real in the sense that I can not only recall actual events but can 
propel myself back into them, be there again in my Aunt Jean’s room-
and-kitchen, standing by the window at the back of the buildings, star-
ing out at the outside staircase and the tops of the wash-houses, while 
behind me Jean asks what is the matter. . . . That is what I call real 
memory, not at all the same as “remembering” being taken to Ash-
ley Street School to demonstrate my boasted ability to read. Though, 
because my mother later told me about it so often, I often claimed to 
remember it and could easily convince myself that I did.1
Up to that point in the book, she describes the life of a rather dif­
ficult little girl called Margaret as just another member of the 
family, but from then on everything is viewed through the lens 
of personal experience. The transition, as biography switches to 
autobiography, may even herald the arrival of the concept of self. 
It is the beginning of memory as a recursive phenomenon, with 
previous experience inserted into present consciousness. 
My own conscious memory also begins at around five, when I  
trudged about a mile up a country road to my first school, ac-
companied by older boys from down the road whom my mother  

84   chapter 5
entrusted to look after me, but in fact they tormented me for wear-
ing glasses. There are a few earlier episodes that I imagine I remem-
ber, but they may well be fabrications from things that were told to  
me. I often ask my undergraduate classes to declare their earliest 
memories. There are always a few souls who claim memories going 
back to infancy, even to birth, but most of the memories come up 
from age four or five. This pattern is corroborated in adult surveys 
of remembered events before the age of eight. Virtually no memo-
ries were recorded from the first three years of life, rising steadily 
to all adults remembering events from the first eight years.2 
In the nomenclature of modern cognitive psychology, Margaret 
Forster’s distinction between “real memory” and “remembering” 
is out of line. The term “remembering” is usually taken to refer to 
memory for actual events, located in time and space. This is also 
known as episodic memory. It involves consciously projecting one-
self back in time, just as Margaret Forster did. The term “know-
ing” refers to the other kind of memory, also known as semantic 
memory, which is the storehouse of knowledge that we possess, but 
that does not involve any sense of conscious recollection.3 I know 
that Paris is in France, but have no conscious memory of when I 
learned this. On the other hand I can vividly remember being in 
class as an eleven-year-old when I discovered that (2n + 1), where 
n is any integer, was a general expression for an odd number. My 
memory is tinged with triumph, because we were asked to generate 
this expression ourselves, and I was the only one who did so.4
Episodic memory may combine with some aspects of semantic 
memory to make up what is known as autobiographical memory.5 
As the passage from Margaret Forster illustrates, it is often difficult 
to distinguish which parts of autobiographical memory are based 
on remembered episodes, and which on knowledge. In the study  
referred to above, the adults were not only asked to recall memo-
ries, but were also asked to describe things that they knew had 
happened to them, but could not actually remember. Know-
ing but not remembering early events depends largely on family 
folklore—stories, often repeatedly told, of childhood events, and 
often embellished through imagination to the point that one has  
the sense of re-experiencing them. Nevertheless “known” events de­

clined steadily from birth to age eight, while “remembered” events 
increased from age two to age eight.
Endel Tulving has described remembering as autonoetic, or self-
knowing, in that one has projected one’s self into the past to re-
experience some earlier episode.6 Simply knowing something, like 
the boiling point of water, is noetic, and implies no shift of con-
sciousness. Autonoetic awareness, then, is recursive, in that one can 
insert previous personal experience into present awareness. This is 
analogous to the embedding of phrases within phrases, or sentences 
within sentences. Deeper levels of embedding are also pos­sible, as 
when I remember yesterday that I had remembered an event that 
occurred at some earlier time. Chunks of episodic awareness can 
thus be inserted into each other in recursive fashion. Having coffee 
at a conference recently, I was reminded of an earlier conference 
where I managed to spill coffee on a distinguished philosopher. 
This is memory of a memory of an event. I shall suggest later that 
this kind of embedding may have set the stage for the recursive 
structure of language itself.
Amnesias
Brain imaging suggests that there may be considerable overlap in 
the areas activated when people retrieve episodic and semantic 
memories, but each kind of retrieval also activates unique regions.7 
In cases of amnesia, which is the loss of memory caused by brain 
injury, it is episodic memory that usually carries the brunt of the 
loss. Semantic memory is relatively unimpaired. One well-known 
case is the musician Clive Wearing, whose plight has been aired in 
several television documentaries and in a book written by his wife 
Deborah.8 Wearing was an acknowledged expert on early music 
and had built up a musical career with the BBC, when at the age of 
46 he became ill with the herpes simplex virus. This effectively de-
stroyed his hippocampus, a structure in the inferior temporal lobe 
that is critical to memory. Wearing’s condition is well described by 
the title of a 2005 ITV documentary, The Man with the 7-Second 
Memory. That is, he has sufficient short-term memory to be able to 
Reliving the Past   85

86   chapter 5
respond to questions, and even converse, although he quickly for-
gets topics that he spoke about moments earlier.9 He does remem-
ber some aspects of his life before the illness. For example he rec-
ognizes his children, but does not recall their names. Much of his 
semantic memory, though, remains intact. His vocabulary is largely  
unaffected, and he still knows how to play the piano or conduct 
a choir. 
The most extensively studied case of amnesia for events is that 
of H. M., who underwent surgery for intractable epilepsy at the 
age of 27.10 The surgery destroyed most of his hippocampus, along 
with surrounding regions, and left him in much the same state as 
Clive Wearing. He remembered some of his pre-illness life, but suf-
fers memory loss reaching back in time from the operation, with 
better recall of earlier than of later events. This has led to the view 
that the hippocampus is responsible for laying down memories, 
and somehow holds them temporarily while consolidation takes 
place elsewhere in the brain. Loss of hippocampal function there-
fore not only prevents new memories from being formed, but also 
destroys past memories that are temporarily held there, before be-
ing distributed to other brain regions. The holding operation may 
last several years, with diminishing effectiveness, as the hippocam-
pus relinquishes its grip.11 
There has been some dispute about whether semantic memory 
and episodic memory are truly distinct. One might suppose, for ex­
ample, that episodic memory is fragile simply because it is based on 
single events, whereas semantic memory is based on information 
that is repeated, and may be present in multiple episodes. Endel  
Tulving has undertaken careful studies of a particular patient, 
known as K. C., and shown that his difficulty with episodic memory 
relative to semantic memory cannot be attributed to the frequency 
with which the recorded information is presented. K. C. can recall 
factual information that he is unlikely to have rehearsed repeat-
edly, but cannot bring to mind events that lasted several days, such 
as being evacuated from home, along with tens of thousands of 
others, when a nearby derailment released toxic chemicals. This 
suggests that episodic memory can fail even when there is likely 
to have been repeated rehearsal. Tulving refers also to controlled 
experiments leading to the same conclusion.12 

Reliving the Past   87
Tulving nevertheless argues that the storage of episodic memo-
ries depends on semantic memories that are already in place—one 
can scarcely record a visit to a restaurant without already knowing 
what a restaurant is, and what happens there—but are then related  
to the self in subjectively sensed time. This allows the actual ex-
perience of the event to be stored separately from the semantic 
system.13 In this view, episodic memories could not be stored in the 
absence of semantic memory, which is perhaps why our childhood 
episodic memories do not begin until the semantic system is well 
established, by around age four or five. Nevertheless there is some 
evidence that episodic and semantic memories are more broadly 
dissociated. People with semantic dementia, a degenerative neuro-
logical disorder that afflicts some people in late adulthood, show 
severe decline in semantic memory, but their episodic memories 
remain remarkably and surprisingly intact.14 
Unconscious Memory
There is another category of memory that appears to remain in-
tact in cases of profound amnesia. This illustrated by the finding 
that H. M. could learn new skills, such as mirror drawing, where 
the task is to draw or trace a shape while viewing the hand and 
shape only in a mirror. This is a difficult task, because the tracing 
movements you see in the mirror are front-back reversed relative 
to the actual movements. H. M. improved with practice, just as 
people without memory deficits do, yet never remembered hav-
ing done it before. He even showed consistent improvement on 
tasks that require mental operations, rather than learned move-
ments. One example is the Tower of Hanoi task, in which rings are 
stacked in order of size on one of three pegs, with the largest ring 
at the bottom. The task is to move the entire stack to another peg 
one at a time, using all three pegs, but without ever placing a larger 
ring on a smaller one. Again, H. M. showed systematic improve-
ment, although he never consciously recalled seeing the problem 
on previous attempts.
The unconscious memory that underlies these skills is called im-
plicit memory, which enables us to learn without any awareness 

88   chapter 5
that we are doing so. It is presumably more primitive in an evo-
lutionary sense than is explicit memory, which is made up of se-
mantic and episodic memory. Explicit memory is sometimes called 
declarative memory because it is the kind of memory we can talk 
about or declare. Implicit memory does not depend on the hippo-
campus, so amnesia resulting from hippocampal damage does not 
entirely prevent adaptation to new environments or condition, but 
such adaptation does not enter consciousness. I am a poor typist,  
and could not consciously tell where the keys are placed on the key­
board, except perhaps for the rather touching [sic] fact that U and 
I are side by side, but my fingers find their way very quickly to the 
appropriate keys. This is implicit memory. I should add that I only 
use two fingers. The others know nothing. 
Implicit memory is sometimes measured through a technique 
called priming. For example, if people are asked to recall a series 
of words they have been shown in the laboratory, their recall of 
individual words may be enhanced if they are preceded by some 
related word, or prime. For example, the word animal may prime 
recall of the word aardvark. Priming is remarkably resilient. In 
one study, for example, fragments of pictures were used to prime 
recognition of whole pictures of objects. When the same fragments 
were shown 17 years later to people who had taken part in the 
original experiment, they were able to write the name of the ob-
ject associated with each fragment much more accurately than a 
control group who had not previously seen the fragments. Some 
of the people involved had no conscious recollection at all of the 
laboratory experiment 17 years earlier, and these people actually 
scored slightly higher on the priming measure than those who did 
remember the previous occasion.15 
The Fragility of Memory
Implicit memory, then, is unconscious and seemingly invulnerable, 
whereas our episodic memories are fragile, even in the absence of 
brain injury. Indeed, we are not nearly as good at remembering 
events as we think we are. At one time it was thought that we store 
everything that we were ever conscious of, and that the reason that 

Reliving the Past   89
we seem to forget so much has to do with retrieval failure. That  
is, there are lots of things stored in memory that we can’t find. It is 
true that retrieval is fickle—we all have the experience of being em-
barrassingly unable to remember someone’s name when we need 
to introduce that person to a group of friends, only to remember 
it later when it no longer matters. More recent research suggests 
that memory failure is not just a matter of retrieval failure, which 
of course does occur, but also reflects failures of storage.16 For this 
reason, a school reunion is a sobering experience.17 At one such 
event, my school friends frequently recounted some apparently sa-
lient event that seemed to have completely escaped my own recol-
lection, even though I was supposedly present when it happened. 
Symmetry was restored when I told of events that others seem to 
have forgotten. And of course some stories were embellished be-
yond recognition anyway. Some of my old mates, I do remember, 
were compulsive liars.
We now know that our memories are sieve-like; in fact, such is 
the length and complexity of our conscious lives that we retain prob­
ably only a tiny fraction. The émigré Czech writer Milan Kundera, 
in his novel Ignorance, put it like this:
The fundamental given is the ratio between the amount of time in 
the lived life and the amount of time from that life that is stored in 
memory. No one has ever tried to calculate this ratio, and in fact there 
exists no technique for doing so; yet without much risk of error I could 
assume that the memory retains no more than a millionth, a hundred-
millionth, in short an utterly infinitesimal bit of the lived life. That 
fact too is part of the essence of man. If someone could retain in his 
memory everything that he had experienced, if he could at any time 
call up any fragment of his past, he would be nothing like human be-
ings: neither his loves nor his friendships nor his capacity to forgive or 
avenge would resemble ours.18
Well, perhaps that’s an exaggeration—a hundred-millionth 
would amount to about 15 minutes’ worth. Still, most of our con-
scious lives slip by without lasting trace.
The paucity of our memory for events may nevertheless be adap­
tive, since to remember everything that happens to us could be 
debilitating, clogging our minds with unwanted junk—like old 

90   chapter 5
clothes. Some individuals, in fact seem to suffer precisely because 
their memories are too good.
Can You Have Too Much Memory?
New Zealand children of my generation were brought up with a 
substance known as Marmite, a spread that is roughly the cultural 
equivalent of peanut butter in the United States. The jar contained 
the message “Too much spoils the flavor.” To those not raised with 
this substance, the flavor is repugnant anyway, no matter how little 
you smear onto your slice of bread. The idea that too much might 
spoil the flavor must have been a poor marketing strategy, and the 
message no longer appears. Memory, perhaps, is a bit like marmite.  
Too much may spoil the mind.
There are indeed reasons to suppose that a good memory may 
be an impediment. A condition known as savant syndrome can re-
sult in prodigious powers of memory, but deficiencies in other as-
pects of intelligence. The most extraordinary case so far described 
is that of Kim Peek, who was the inspiration for the movie Rain 
Man.19 Peek, known to his friends as “Kim-puter,” began memo-
rizing books at the age of 18 months and in his midfifties has now 
memorized 9,000 books. He has a vast storehouse of knowledge 
in history, sports, movies, space programs, literature, and Shake-
speare, among other things. He has an extensive knowledge of clas-
sical music, and in middle life has even begun to play it. In com-
mon with other savants, he is an expert at calendar calculation, 
and is able to instantly tell you the day of the week for any given  
date. This is known to depend on massive memory.
Yet on a standard test of intelligence, Peek scored only 87 (the 
population average is 100). There was great variation, though, in 
the subscales that go to make up the intelligence score, with some 
in the superior range and others in the range of the mentally re-
tarded. His brain is abnormal, being unusually large and lacking 
the corpus callosum, which is the main fiber tract that connects 
the left and right sides of the brain. Two other tracts that normally 
link the sides of the brain are also missing. He has an unusual side-

Reliving the Past   91
long gait, cannot button his clothes, and cannot handle the chores 
of daily life. He also has difficulty with abstract ideas. What this 
profile suggests is that a large and detailed memory can work to 
the disadvantage of other mental skills, and a memory that is too 
particular can impair ability to see relations and form abstractions. 
Too many trees, and it’s hard to see the wood.
Another case in point was Solomon Shereshevskii, better known 
as “S,” whose prodigious feats of memory were described by the 
Russian neuropsychologist Aleksandr Romanov Luria in his 1968 
book The Mind of a Mnemonist. According to Luria, S’s memory 
capacity was seemingly without limit, and he remembered trivial 
things for extremely long periods of time. For instance, he could 
accurately recall lists of words that Luria had presented 16 years 
earlier. His memory was largely visual, and when given verbal items  
he could transform them mentally, either by arranging them spa-
tially, or using the “method of loci” whereby he would imag­ine 
them in familiar locations. The particularity of his memory was 
actually an impediment, because it prevented him from forming 
general concepts. He was unable to make sense of novels, since he  
would imagine scenes in precise detail, only to find his images con-
tradicted at later stages. S was also a synaesthete—a condition in 
which inputs in one sensory modality give rise to sensations in 
another—so that spoken words were accompanied by visual sen-
sations, such as “puffs” or “splashes,” and a tone at 30 cycles per 
second and 100 decibels gave rise to “a strip 12–15 cm in width 
the color of old tarnished silver.”20
Another case that has recently come to light is that of a woman 
known in the literature as A. J.21 She would not be classed as a sa-
vant, but nonetheless has an unusual and intrusive autobiographi-
cal memory. She was born in 1965, but claims that if you give her 
any date between 1974 and the present she can tell you what day 
of the week it was, what she was doing on that day, and whether 
anything of great importance (such as the Challenger explosion of 
January 28, 1986) occurred. She kept a diary from age 10 to age 
34, but her memory for events evidently does not depend on her re-
reading the diary, which she hardly ever does, nor does she consult 
a calendar before being asked questions about her life. She spends  

92   chapter 5
an excessive amount of time recalling her past, and tests have 
shown that what she does recall is extraordinarily accurate. 
Paradoxically, though, when the researchers made a videotape 
of her and showed it to her a month later, she remembered very lit-
tle of the video session itself, suggesting that her autobiographical 
memory is in fact very selective. Although she seems to remember 
something from every date, the actual amount remembered may be 
only a fraction of what actually happened. She claims to have had 
trouble memorizing historical dates, learning foreign languages or 
science, and got Ds in geometry. Her full scale intelligence quo-
tient (IQ) is 93, a little below average, although she scored 122 on 
a standard memory test. Despite her academic shortcomings, she 
completed a bachelor’s degree in social science, graduating at the 
age of 23. 
Memory, whether exceptional or not, requires huge storage 
space. As mentioned earlier (in case you have forgotten), the av-
erage literate adult probably knows about 50,000 words, which 
implies that she knows about the same number of concepts, in-
cluding objects, actions, qualities, professions, emotions—and 
on and on.22 Episodic memories are generally made up of differ-
ent combinations of otherwise familiar concepts, as in who did 
what to whom, when where and why. To accommodate all of this 
memory, it is not surprising that the human brain is large, even 
by primate standards. Something like 10 billion neurons exist in 
the human brain, each connected to other neurons—in fact, some 
neurons have as many as 30,000 connections. It’s hard to get one’s 
head around such numbers, even though they are in fact contained 
within the head. Given that memories are probably stored in terms 
of interconnections between neurons, one may be tempted to be-
lieve that the brain has infinite capacity. But the brain has lots of 
other things to do besides store memories. I suspect therefore that 
there is something of a trade-off between different mental pursuits, 
and obsession with some pursuits may prevent others from devel-
oping. Sometimes, as in the case of people with savant syndrome, 
the reason for the imbalance may be pathological—some defect of 
growth or hormone balance that allowed some faculties to develop 

at the expense of others. In other cases, perhaps, obsessions may 
arise in response to cataclysmic life events. And there is no doubt 
normal variation. Life would be dull if this were not so.
False Memories
When I was younger I could remember anything, whether it had 
happened or not, but my faculties are decaying now, and soon I 
shall be so I cannot remember any but things that never happened.
—Mark Twain
Although our memories of the past can be vivid, to the point that 
we seem to re-experience them, they can fail to be true to the origi-
nal experience. Our memories of earlier exploits are often embel-
lished or distorted, and often downright false—we “remember” 
events that simply never happened. The pioneer of research in this 
field, Elizabeth Loftus, recounts a false memory of her own moth-
er’s death:
I remember a summer many years ago. I was fourteen years old. My 
mother, my aunt Pearl, and I were on vacation, visiting my uncle Joe 
in Pennsylvania. One bright sunny morning I woke up and my mother 
was dead, drowned in a swimming pool.23
The scene to her is vivid. In her mind she sees and smells cool pine 
trees, tastes iced tea, and sees her mother in her nightgown, floating 
face down. She cries out in terror, starts screaming, sees the police 
cars, lights flashing, and the stretcher carrying her mother’s body. 
But the memory is false. She was in fact asleep when the body was 
discovered, not by her but by her Aunt Pearl. The memory is a con-
struction, built partly of knowledge of what happened, and partly 
of extra details supplied by imagination.
Loftus studied false memory experimentally by giving people 
short narratives, constructed by family members, of events in their 
childhood. She then asked them for their memories of these events. 
One of the narratives described being lost in a mall, but was en-
tirely false. About a quarter of her sample claimed to remember 
Reliving the Past   93

94   chapter 5
the event, and some even supplied details that had not been men-
tioned in the narrative. This study took place in 1991, and has been  
repeated many times with other false narratives that were neverthe-
less “remembered,” such as being taken for a ride in a hot-air bal-
loon, being attacked by a vicious animal, or being nearly drowned  
and rescued by a lifeguard. False memory is also studied using 
more prosaic methods, such as giving people lists of words to re-
member that omit one very obvious word; when asked to recall the 
list, participants will often insist that the missing word had actually  
been presented. For example, the list may include words like bed, 
dream, rest, awake, and so on, omitting the word sleep, but around 
half of the participants later remember the word sleep as having 
been in the list.24 This experiment has become something of a cot-
tage industry in experimental psychology, and is a regular feature 
of undergraduate laboratories.
Actually, false memories were widely discussed in the late nine-
teenth century, and were known as paramnesias.25 An especially 
horrific example is described by the hypnotherapist Hippolyte  
Bernheim, who recounts how he suggested to a patient that she 
had witnessed through a keyhole an old man raping a little girl, 
who struggled, was bleeding, and was then gagged. His suggestion 
concludes “When you wake up you will think no more about it. I 
have not told the story to you; it is not a dream; it is not a vision I 
have given you during your hypnotic sleep; it is truth itself.” Three 
days later Bernheim asked a friend and distinguished lawyer to 
question the patient as though he were an examining judge. The 
patient recounted the events in detail as suggested to her, and even 
when encouraged to doubt them maintained the truth of the tes-
timony “with immovable conviction.”26 Today, fortunately, ethical 
regulations would forbid such a study. 
In recent times, the question of false memory has been revived 
and has assumed special importance. In the 1980s and 1990s, many 
therapists adopted the view that psychological problems in adult-
hood could be traced to sexual abuse during childhood. Because 
of their traumatic nature, such memories were often repressed, and 
the main purpose of therapy was to recover these memories, so 

Reliving the Past   95
that patients could then face the real causes of their problems and 
deal with them—presumably with the therapist’s help. The most 
extreme expression of this view was a book by Ellen Bass and 
Laura Davis entitled The Courage to Heal, which was first pub-
lished in 1988 but has since gone through several editions. Bass 
and Davis, who had no formal training in psychology or psychia-
try, were nevertheless bold enough to tell their readers:
If you don’t remember your abuse, you are not alone. Many women 
don’t have memories, and some never get memories. This doesn’t mean 
they weren’t abused.
In another notorious quote from the book, Bass and Davis write, 
“If you think you were abused, and your life shows the symp-
toms, then you were.” This statement commits the logical fallacy 
of affirming the consequent. It is undoubtedly true that childhood 
abuse can cause later symptoms of psychological distress, but this 
does not mean that psychological stress must have resulted from 
childhood abuse. Murder results in death, but this does not mean 
that death is always due to murder. Unfortunately, widespread ac­
ceptance of Bass and Davis’s edict too often led to aggressive ther-
apy designed to help distressed people recover the memories of 
the abuse that led to their distress.27 This led to the recovery of 
“memory” for events that did not happen, just as Loftus’s experi-
mental subjects were never in fact lost in a mall. The whole issue of 
recovered memory versus false memory became intensely political 
in the 1990s, with many cases of men being given jail sentences for 
abuse despite being entirely innocent;28 one such case in my own 
country is described in detail in a prize-winning book.29 
An Evolutionary Perspective
By now it will be apparent that memory is not quite what it seems. 
It is far from a faithful record of past events, and is also complex, 
made up of several systems. This is an appropriate point, then, to 
consider the evolution of memory systems, and how they might 

96   chapter 5
contribute to the adaptive fitness of organisms. I shall suggest that 
there is a hierarchy of memory systems, each contributing in a spe-
cial way. I will here take “memory” to mean any adaptation involv-
ing some change in an animal’s behavior that results in increased 
fitness.
A good proportion of behavioral adaptations are instincts, which  
are “memories” only in the sense that they refer to adaptive changes 
that took place in earlier generations, and were transmitted geneti-
cally. Genetic endowment is not sufficient, though, and instinctive 
behaviors will often not develop unless the environmental condi-
tions are adequate. Instincts can be quite complex, and include ac-
tivities such as seasonal migrations of birds and animals, hoarding 
and caching, dam-building in beavers, and so forth. These are ef-
fective adaptations to predictable seasonal events, and are effective 
so long as seasonal changes are indeed regular. Such instincts can 
be disrupted by climate change, or by the predations of other spe-
cies, especially humans, with our unparalleled capacity to wreak 
destruction, not only on the geography of the planet, but also on 
seasonal change itself.
Of course we humans also have lots of instincts, such as emo-
tions, sexual drive, and, one may think, a predisposition to gossip. 
Steven Pinker has maintained that language itself is an instinct;30 
given normal development all humans talk or sign, some of them 
too much. Again though it does depend on the environment, and 
a child brought up without human contact will not develop lan-
guage, as illustrated by the famous case of Genie, a girl who was 
isolated until the age of 13 and never learned proper language.31 
Of course the particular languages we learn also depend on the par­
ticular linguistic environment we are brought up in; I fear I will 
never learn Chinese. The development of birdsong involves simi-
lar principles. Although fundamentally instinctive, the song of the 
chaffinch requires that the young bird be reared where it can hear 
the song of other chaffinches.
Learning offers a more flexible means of adaptation, since it al-
lows adjustment to environmental events or contingencies that oc-
cur in the individual’s own lifetime. One form of learning is classi-
cal conditioning, made famous by Ivan P. Pavlov’s demonstration 

Reliving the Past   97
that if a bell is sounded prior to the presentation of food, animals 
soon salivate to the bell.32 More generally, classical conditioning 
may serve to generate appropriate emotional or anticipatory re-
sponses to situations, animals, or objects that pose threats or prom­
ise rewards. Classical conditioning depends on the involuntary eli­
citation of bodily events, such as salivation, blushing, or emotional 
responses like fear and anger, which then become attached to pre-
viously neutral events. 
Pavlov’s experiments were carried out with dogs. The most fa­
mous (not to say notorious) study of classical conditioning in 
humans was carried out by the founder of behaviorism, John B. 
Watson. The subject 33 was a nine-month-old orphan boy known 
as Little Albert.34 Watson first determined that Little Albert was 
not afraid of objects, such as a rat, rabbit, monkey, dog, or mask, 
but that he was afraid of a loud noise, created by banging a metal 
bar with a hammer. By presenting the rat and the noise at the same 
time, Watson was able to condition Little Albert to be afraid of the 
rat alone—and incidentally afraid of all the other objects as well. 
Little Albert was adopted shortly after these unfortunate experi-
ences, and Watson did not have the opportunity to recondition him  
not to fear these objects. One must feel sympathy for both little 
Albert and his adoptive parents, and as in the earlier study by Bern­
heim, no ethics committee nowadays would permit such an ex- 
periment to be repeated.
Another form of conditioning, known as operant conditioning,  
involves the shaping of behaviors that are emitted rather than elic-
ited, and might therefore be considered voluntary rather than in-
voluntary. Such behaviors might include a rat pressing a bar, a pi-
geon pecking a disk, or a human operating a gambling machine in 
a casino. In operant conditioning, such behaviors are progressively  
controlled, or “shaped,” by the delivery of rewards and punish-
ments. They can also be brought under what operant psychologists 
call stimulus control; if otherwise neutral stimuli or events are as-
sociated with the rewards and punishments, they too can shape 
behavior. The dinner bell, then, may not only induce salivation, but 
may also serve as the signal to enter the dining hall. The behavior-
ist B. F. Skinner sought to explain all human behavior, including 

98   chapter 5
language, through the principles of operant conditioning,35 lead-
ing to the somewhat robotic view of human society and behavior 
described in his utopian novel, Walden Two.36 
These different forms of conditioning may be said to fall into the 
category of implicit memory. As we have seen, implicit memory 
may also include the learning of skills and even mental strategies to 
cope with environmental challenges. Implicit memories are elicited 
by the immediate environment, and do not involve consciousness 
or volition. Of course one may remember the experience of learning 
to ride a bicycle, but that is distinct from the learning itself. Many  
of my own childhood memories involve bicycles, including being 
launched by one parent in the direction of the other, turned around 
and launched again, thus riding in wobbly fashion back and forth. 
I still bear the scar from a later fall, which I remember vividly. I 
was nine years old, and I can remember the doctor’s amusement, as 
he stitched up the gash in my knee, when I asked him if the wound 
would be fatal.37 These are episodic memories, independent of the 
process of actually learning (more or less) to ride the bike.
Compared to implicit memory, explicit memory provides yet 
more adaptive flexibility, because it does not depend on immedi-
ate evocation from the environment. That is, we can consciously 
bring to mind such memories at any time, as when we muse about 
what happened yesterday, or try to bring to mind specific places 
or people that we know. This is not to say that the environment is 
unimportant, since we are constantly reminded of events by hap-
penings in the world around us, or by probing questions, such as 
What on earth were you up to last night?
As we have seen, explicit memory includes both semantic and 
episodic memory. Our semantic memories are vast storehouses of 
facts about the world, including physical knowledge of the world 
and the particular environments that we inhabit, knowledge of 
our friends and how they behave, and even some knowledge of 
how language works, including vocabulary, some rules of gram-
mar, and pragmatics—the different ways we can use language to 
achieve social goals. Language, though, is complex, and grammar 
for the most part depends on implicit rules—even linguists haven’t 
figured them all out explicitly. By and large, semantic memory is 

Reliving the Past   99
the stuff of education, and is continually being upgraded and ex-
panded through the processes of science and technological inven-
tion. Sometimes, it all seems too much.
Episodic memory, then, sits at the top of an evolutionary pyra-
mid, providing the ultimate in fine-tuning our personal lives. By re-
cording specific events, we can react more precisely to similar events  
in the future, and plan future activities in detail. We can also in-
tentionally sift through different episodes in our lives to extract 
relevant information—perhaps in a fashion analogous to the in-
sertion of phrases into sentences, or sentences into narratives. By 
knowing what went wrong on previous occasions, we can avoid a 
similar catastrophe in the future. On this view, then, episodic mem­
ory is not so much a permanent record of past events as a series of 
YouTube–like sequences, sometimes embellished or distorted, to 
provide a stock of situations that we can use to construct viable 
and detailed futures. Clearly it would be wasteful of storage space 
to record every event that we experience, since our daily lives are 
full of repetition. Repetitive events may well contribute to seman-
tic memory, the generalities of the world, but episodic memory is 
concerned with salient particularities. That said, it is still not clear 
from research precisely which episodes are likely to be remembered 
and which are not. Episodic memory has a fickleness about it.
But there is more to the story than the examination of the past. 
As we shall see in the next chapter, episodic memory may also pro-
vide us with a sense of time, extending into the future as well as 
the past.

6
About Time
“It’s a poor sort of memory that only works backwards,”  
the Queen remarked.
—Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking Glass
One important aspect of episodic memory is that it locates events in 
time. Although we are often not clear precisely when remembered 
events happened, we usually have at least a rough idea, and this 
is sufficient to give rise to the general understanding of time itself. 
Episodic memory allows us to travel back in time, and consciously 
relive previous experiences. Thomas Suddendorf called this mental 
time travel, and made the important suggestion that mental time 
travel allows us to imagine future events as well as remember past 
ones.1 It also adds to the recursive possibilities; I might remember, 
for example, that yesterday I had plans to go to the beach tomor-
row. The true significance of episodic memory, then, is that it pro-
vides a vocabulary from which to construct future events, and so 
fine-tune our lives. Natural selection cannot operate on the basis of 
past recollection per se, but only on what it contributes to survival 
in the present and future. 
There is growing support for this suggestion. What has been 
termed episodic future thinking,2 or the ability to imagine future 
events, emerges in children at around the same time as episodic 
memory itself, between the ages of three and four.3 Patients with 
amnesia are as unable to answer simple questions about past events 
as they are to say what might happen in the future.4 Clive Wearing, 
the amnesic musician described in the previous chapter, constantly 
complains that he has no past, and is stuck in the present. He is for-
ever under the impression that he has just woken up. His plight is 

about time   101
captured in the title of his wife’s book, Forever Today. Amnesia for 
specific events, then, is at least in part a loss of the awareness of time.
Brain-imaging studies confirm the close connection between epi-
sodic memory and imagining the future. Indeed the idea of mental 
time travel was anticipated in some of the earliest studies of cere­
bral blood flow by the Swedish physiologist David Ingvar, who 
concluded that activation in the prefrontal cortex was especially 
important in providing the internal connection between past and 
future. He wrote:
On the basis of previous experiences, represented in memories, the 
brain—one’s mind—is automatically busy with extrapolation of future  
events and, as it appears, constructing alternative hypothetical behav-
ior patterns in order to be ready for what may happen.5
Using more refined techniques based on functional magnetic res-
onance imaging (fMRI), Daniel L. Schacter and his colleagues at 
Harvard University have shown that parts of the medial temporal 
lobe, as well as the prefrontal cortex, are activated when people  
are prompted to remember past events or to imagine future ones. 
Schacter and colleagues refer to this as a core network.6 But of 
course people can usually distinguish remembered past events from  
imagined future ones, and some studies have shown in several brain  
areas greater activation in response to future than to past events, 
Past event > control
Future event > control
Figure 9. Midsagittal fMRI scans of brain activation elicited by imagining past 
events (left) and future events (right). Activated areas are shown as white.  
(Reprinted from Addis et al. 2007, with permission from Elsevier.)

102   chapter 6
perhaps indicating that imagining the future requires more inten-
sive imaginative construction.7 Some studies, though, have shown 
greater activation in recalling past events than in imagining future 
ones,8 so the evidence is inconsistent. Reliving the past also in-
volves active construction,9 sometimes to the detriment of veracity, 
and I suspect that people may occasionally even confuse imagined 
future events with those that actually happened. The brain itself 
seems to hardly know the difference.
Is Mental Time Travel Unique to Humans?
He said “What’s time? Now is for dogs and apes! Man has  
Forever!” 
—from A Grammarian’s Funeral by Robert Browning
Like Browning’s grammarian, Suddendorf and I also claimed that 
mental time travel, including episodic memory, is uniquely hu-
man.10 The same idea was also suggested by the German psycholo-
gist Wolfgang Köhler. Köhler was working at a primate research 
facility maintained by the Prussian Academy of Sciences in the Ca-
nary Islands when World War I broke out. He was marooned, and 
occupied his time studying the behavior of nine chimpanzees con-
tained in a large outdoor pen. His work is famous for showing that 
chimpanzees sometimes solve mechanical problems through the 
use of insight rather than mere trial and error.11 Köhler neverthe-
less concluded that, for all their improvisational skills, chimpan-
zees had little conception of past or future. Chimpanzees are our 
closest nonhuman relatives, so Köhler’s observation suggests that 
mental time travel evolved at some point after the split between 
the hominin and ape lineages.
The idea that mental time travel is uniquely human has never­
theless been challenged. The most serious challenge comes, not 
from apes, but from birds. Some show prodigious memory for the 
locations in which they have hidden food for later consumption. 
Clark’s nutcrackers seem to be among the most prolific, storing 
seeds in thousands of locations and recovering them with high (but 
not perfect) accuracy.12 This need not mean, though, that they re-
member actually caching the seeds―they may simply know where 

about time   103
the seeds are. It has been suggested that the case for episodic mem-
ory would be strengthened if the birds could be shown to have 
some memory for when the seeds were cached, implying memory 
for time as well as place. Memory that includes storage of what, 
where and when, dubbed www memory,13 has been taken by some 
researchers as sufficient evidence for episodic memory, and there-
fore of mental time travel, at least into the past.
The challenge to demonstrate www memory in birds has been 
taken up by Nicola Clayton and her colleagues at Cambridge Uni-
versity, using scrub jays. In clever experiments, Clayton allowed the  
birds to cache food in different compartments of ice-cream trays.14 
They were given two different foods to cache, worms and peanuts. 
They prefer worms to peanuts, and went to the location where 
worms had been cached rather than to where the peanuts were hid-
den, but only if the worms had been recently cached. If too much 
time had elapsed, and the worms were likely to have decayed and 
become inedible, they went instead to where the peanuts had been  
cached. This suggests that they remembered not only where they 
had hidden a specific food, but when they had hidden it. This im-
plies further that they might have been traveling mentally back in 
time to the point at which they had originally cached the food.
These birds are also apt to steal each other’s cached food. If a 
bird that had itself stolen food was watched while caching its own 
food, it later privately recached it, presumably in order to prevent  
the watcher from stealing it. It takes a thief to know a thief. Re-
caching also depended on which bird was watching. Clayton and 
her colleagues have found that recaching was more likely to occur 
if the predatory watcher was a dominant bird than if it was a sub-
ordinate bird.15 Thus we might add a further w—the birds seem to 
know what, where, when, and who. Their behavior also seems to 
suggest mental time travel into the future as well as into the past, 
since recaching might be taken to imply anticipation of a future 
theft.
Meadow voles, it has been claimed, can also remember what, 
where, and when.16 In an experimental study, male voles were first 
allowed to explore two chambers, one containing a pregnant fe-
male 24 hours prepartum, and the other containing a female that 
was neither lactating nor pregnant. Twenty-four hours later, they 

104   chapter 6
were again given access to the chambers, which were now empty 
and clean, and spent more time exploring the chamber that had con­
tained the previously pregnant female than the one that had housed 
the other female. This suggests that they had remembered the preg-
nant female, and understood that she would now be in postpar-
tum estrus, a state of heightened receptivity. In another condition 
they first explored a chamber containing a female in postpartum 
estrus and another containing a female that was neither lactating 
nor pregnant, and was not in estrus. Twenty-four hours later they 
were again allowed to explore the cages, now clean and empty, and 
showed no preference for the chamber that had housed the female  
in estrus. This suggests that they realized the female would no lon-
ger be in a state of heightened receptivity.
Nevertheless it is perhaps too early to conclude that these an-
imals—birds or voles—can really travel mentally in time in the 
way that we humans do. The retrieval of worms or nuts depending 
on how long they have been cached need not imply that the jays 
actually remember the act of caching, as distinct from knowing 
when and where the food was cached. I know that Captain James 
Cook reached New Zealand in 1769, but I do not remember it; 
indeed I wasn’t even born at the time, despite what my students 
may think. I don’t even remember being told it. In the case of the 
birds, a simple time tag attached to the memory, as a kind of “use-
by date,” could be sufficient. Similarly the voles’ understanding of 
when a female is likely to be receptive could be based on knowl-
edge of ovulation cycles, with a variable time marker attached to 
the memory. A distinction can be drawn between knowing when 
something happened and knowing how long ago it happened, and 
a recent study shows that rats, in choosing where to find food in a 
maze, are governed by the latter, not the former.17 Rats don’t travel 
mentally in time, and there is still no strong reason to suppose that 
scrub jays or voles do either. 
And do the scrub jays recache their food when a likely thief is 
watching because they actually envisage a future act of theft? Not 
necessarily. Their behavior might simply be learned through the 
association of a watcher and subsequent loss of food. 
But we are in difficult territory here, since psychological concepts 
are slippery, and it is often all too easy to explain a set of results in 

about time   105
different ways to suit one’s theoretical predilections. Even if birds 
or voles can be said to have a degree of mental time travel, the con-
text in which it operates is narrow. Scrub jays are specialists in the 
caching and recovery of food, and their behavior in this context 
has evolved subtleties that may not extend to more general activi-
ties. And all animals are specialists in mating. Somehow I doubt  
that they can lie back and reminisce about the past or dream about 
the future, as we humans do.
One theory that affords a potential test of mental time travel into 
the future is the so-called Bischof-Köhler hypothesis, which states 
that only humans can flexibly anticipate their own future mental 
states of need and act in the present to satisfy them.18 We go to the 
supermarket to buy food even though not hungry at the time, or 
attend expensive and often dull university courses in the interests 
of a later lucrative career. There have been several attempts to re-
fute the hypothesis that such behaviors are unique to our species. 
In one study, for example, scrub jays, given the choice of two foods 
to cache, ceased to cache one of those foods if it would be avail-
able later when they were hungry.19 However, this behavior could  
have been based on learning rather than on the anticipation of 
which food would be available later, when hunger struck20—there 
seems no good reason to suppose that the birds traveled mentally 
in time to a future occasion when they would be hungry. In all cases  
so far described, processes simpler than mental time travel can ac-
count for the findings.
The manufacture of tools for specific purposes is also sometimes 
taken as evidence for mental time travel into the future. Here, I’m 
afraid, we must yet again defer to birds, since New Caledonian 
crows are able to manufacture tools from twigs and bits of wire 
to solve mechanical problems, although chimpanzees make tools 
of at least comparable complexity.21 Of course many examples of 
tool use may be a simple matter of improvisation to solve immedi-
ate problems, rather than planning for a more distant future. More 
convincing evidence of future thinking comes from the crows’ abil-
ity to shape leaves from pandanus trees. These leaves have spikes 
along one side, and are therefore useful for inserting into holes 
containing grubs, which are then caught on the spikes and ex-
tracted. The crows shape these tools in tapered fashion, so that the 

106   chapter 6
wider end is held in the beak and the narrow end inserted into the 
hole. Given the ubiquity of these tools, the standardization of de-
sign, and the evidence for cultural transmission of technique,22 it is 
highly unlikely that they are simply the outcome of improvisation. 
These tools are planned.
Chimpanzees also show many cultural variations, in the way in  
which they use tools as well as in other behaviors.23 And some 
groups of chimpanzees do store hammers and anvils for years of 
use in cracking nuts, although this need not mean that they actu-
ally imagine themselves using these tools in the future.24 Neverthe-
less there has been a recent claim that orangutans and bonobos,  
at least, save tools not needed in the present for use up to 14 hours 
later, which might suggest mental time travel,25 although it is not 
entirely clear that the animals were not responding simply on the 
basis of past associations, rather than actively imagining a future 
event.26 The bonobo Kanzi is said to be able to lead someone to a 
location where he knows something to be located, but again this 
need not imply that he remembers the act of visiting that location 
previously. The critical distinction between knowing and remem-
bering is actually very difficult to test in nonhuman species.
In humans, at least, mental time travel implies the conscious act-
ing out of episodes, whether past or future, which further suggests 
recursion. That is, a conscious episode is embedded in present con-
sciousness. This can proceed to deeper levels, as when I remember 
that yesterday I planned an episode—perhaps a dinner party, for 
some date in the future. It may be this recursively embedded struc-
ture that differentiates our own time-governed behavior from that 
of other species. 
Time and the Human Condition
We might concede that there is limited ability for remembering 
past events in other species, and perhaps even for imagining future 
ones, but this pales beside the extraordinary impact that mental 
time travel has had on the human condition. Manufactured stone 
tools go back some two million years in hominin evolution, and 

about time   107
probably reflect an emerging understanding of the concept of time. 
Events located in time prey heavily on our conscious lives, whether 
in reminiscing, regretting past mistakes and hoping to eradicate 
them in the future, planning dinner parties and weddings, imagin-
ing what life will be like after retirement. We are ruled by clocks, 
calendars, diaries, appointments, anniversaries—and taxes. Indeed 
our concept of time now extends back to the very origin of the 
universe, which came about, we are told, in a Big Bang somewhere 
around 13.7 billion years ago.27 This claim of course leads to meta-
physical anxiety about what was going on before that.
All species are driven to some extent by time, as in seasonal 
changes or the daily cycle of the sun, but these depend on bodily 
rhythms as well as on external signals, such as temperature or am-
bient light. Humans have measured time in deliberate fashion, to 
guide intentional behaviors. We measure it in seconds, minutes, 
hours, days of the week, months, years, centuries, millennia, epochs, 
eras, eons. These can be understood recursively, in that each element  
of time is embedded in a larger one—like the smaller fleas on the 
backs of larger ones in Augustus de Morgan’s poem. Time can also 
be understood as cyclic rather than linear.28 Seconds within minutes, 
Figure 10. Descartes discovers he exists through time (author’s drawing).

108   chapter 6
minutes within hours, hours within days, days within weeks, weeks 
within months, months within years, and so forth, all circle around 
in a dazzling array of wheels within wheels. Explicit labels, such 
as clock times, specific days of the week, or months of the year, 
can help us locate specific events in time, independently of bodily 
rhythms or seasonal fluctuations. 
As I suggested in chapter 1, it is perhaps through iteration rather 
than true recursion that we understand the nature of time. Just as 
tomorrows extend indefinitely into the future, so yesterdays ex-
tend indefinitely back into the past. This generalized notion of time  
comes with costs, such as a lingering sense of guilt for remembered 
indiscretions, or anxiety over anticipated events that might repeat 
earlier unpleasant ones. The most fateful consequence of mental  
time travel, though, may be the understanding that we will all die. 
The lines of David Watts’s hymn “Oh God our Help in Ages Past,” 
based on Psalm 90, tell the truth we all must face:
Time like an ever rolling stream,
Bears all its sons away,
They fly forgotten as a dream
Dies at the opening day.
The understanding of death, along with theory of mind, is of 
course an unpalatable aspect of the human condition, but it is mod-
erated to some extent by the understanding that time continues be­
yond death. Our lives, perhaps, can be continued in those of our 
offspring. One function of religions, though, might be to instill the 
notion that life itself can continue after death, whether in the form 
of Heaven, Hell, Valhalla, or Nirvana. This belief in life everlast-
ing may offer comfort through the promise of rewards after death, 
thereby providing some consolation from the sheer bleakness that 
death otherwise suggests. It can also be used to manipulate behav-
ior, as in threats of hellfire and damnation if we do not conform to 
certain rules of behavior, or heavenly rewards if we do. Acts of ter-
rorism through suicide, as in the destruction of the Twin Towers in 
New York on 11 September 2001, or Japanese kamikaze pilots who 
died for their emperor in World War II, might be considered extreme 

about time   109
examples of such manipulation, although one might argue that all 
soldiers who submit to warfare are similarly manipulated, and cel-
ebrations of the glorious dead continue long after a war is over. The 
offer of life after death, with associated rewards and punishments, 
is remarkably ingenious, since there seems no way in which we 
can be either gratified or disappointed—at least if these emotions 
are restricted to the living. This may explain the origin of faith.
The relation of religion to the sense of time is born out by the 
Pirahã, the small Amazonian community that we encountered in 
chapter 2. It was the Pirahã’s lack of a sense of time, and conse­quent 
failure to understand what religion is all about, that led Daniel  
Everett to forego his career as a missionary among them and be-
come an atheist—and a professor.29 
The Pirahã notwithstanding, we can trace something of the pre-
history of mental time travel through burial sites. There is some ev-
idence that the Neandertals buried their dead, although the reasons 
for burial may have been more practical than religious. In some  
early human burials, though, symbolic material is added to the 
grave, suggesting that those who buried their dead had some no-
tion of a spiritual life that continued after death of the body. At 
least from the evidence to date, such burials were restricted to our 
own species, Homo sapiens.30 Perhaps the earliest example is from 
a burial site at Qafzeh Cave in Israel, in which the head of a deer 
was placed on the body of a child who was buried. This burial is 
dated at about 100,000 years ago, and is associated with early 
anatomically modern humans.31 
The understanding of time is of course not all bad news. Some-
times the knowledge that time will pass is a consolation, as when 
Viola in Shakespeare’s Twelfth Night, masquerading as a man, 
finds herself in an impossible situation, and is moved to say
O Time, thou must untangle this, not I;
It is too hard a knot for me t’untie!
And it is arguably the understanding of time that has shaped hu-
man destiny. Instinctive behaviors like dam-building in beavers or 
migrations in birds are future-oriented, but in limited and inflexible  

110   chapter 6
ways, at least compared to the extraordinary way in which we 
humans can plan our futures, or manufacture buildings, transpor-
tation devices, household conveniences, suitable clothing, and im-
pressive CVs, that help us guarantee future prospects.
According to Ayurveda, the ancient Indian science of life, “You 
are what you eat.” Much more obviously, though, we are what we 
remember, and what we plan. Mental time travel, then, provides 
us with the concept of a conscious self that extends in time. The 
psychologists Hazel Markus and Paula Nurius wrote of “possible 
selves,” derived from representations of the self in the past and 
including representations of the self in the future.32 The pioneering 
psychologist William James expressed much the same idea when he 
wrote of “potential social Me” as distinct from “immediate pres-
ent Me” and “Me of the past.”33 The concept of different possible 
selves provides the primary motivation that guides our future en-
deavors. As Markus and Nurius put it, “I am now a psychologist, 
but I could be a restaurant owner, a marathon runner, a journalist, 
or the parent of a handicapped child.”34 The motivation can oper-
ate both positively and negatively; I can imagine myself as a roar-
ing success, whether at parties, on the rugby field, or in scientific 
achievement, or I can see myself as a dismal failure.
Mental Time Travel and Fiction
The concept of mental time travel helps explain the fragility of 
episodic memory, documented in the previous chapter. The impor-
tance of episodic memory, then, lies not in providing a detailed re­
cord of the past, which it does very poorly, but rather in its role in 
constructing future scenarios. As we have seen, episodic memory 
itself is essentially a construction; Ulric Neisser recently wrote, 
“Remembering is not like playing back a tape or looking at a pic-
ture; it is more like telling a story.”35 It is a process whereby we 
establish our own identities, often in defiance of the facts.
This leads to fiction itself. The same constructive process that al-
lows us to reconstruct the past and construct possible futures also 

about time   111
allows us to invent stories. We humans are addicted to folktales, 
legends, novels, movies, plays, soap operas, and everyday gossip. It 
is the power of recursion that makes these things possible. Critical 
to all of them is language, the device that enables us to share our 
memories, future plans, and dreams. More of that, though, in the 
next chapter.

7
The Grammar of Time
Jane Goodall, who knows chimpanzees better than anyone else 
does, was recently asked how close chimpanzees are to humans. 
She replied:
What’s the one obvious thing we humans do that they don’t do? 
Chimps can learn sign language, but in the wild, so far as we know, 
they are unable to communicate about things that aren’t present. They 
can’t teach what happened 100 years ago, except by showing fear in 
certain places. They certainly can’t plan for five years ahead. If they 
could, they could communicate with each other about what compels 
them to indulge in their dramatic displays. To me, it is a sense of won­
der and awe that we share with them. When we had those feelings, 
and evolved the ability to talk about them, we were able to create the 
early religions.1
So far, there is little convincing evidence that animals other than 
humans are capable of mental time travel—or if they are, their men­
tal excursions into past or future have little of the extraordinary 
flexibility and broad provenance that we see in our own imagi­
native journeys. The limited evidence from nonhuman animals 
typically comes from behaviors that are fundamentally instinctive, 
such as food caching or mating, whereas in humans mental time 
travel seems to cover all aspects of our complex lives. 
One problem, though, is that it is relatively easy to assess mental 
time travel in humans through the use of language, but there is so 
far no clear means of assessing it in nonhuman animals. As we saw 
in the previous chapter, one suggested criterion for the assessment 
of episodic memory, or mental travel into the past, is the www cri­
terion; that is, an animal might be said to have demonstrated epi­
sodic memory if its behavior showed recollection of what, where, 
and when. I argued that this does not quite do the trick, as we can 

the grammar of time   113
know the whats, wheres, and whens of events without necessarily 
reliving them in our minds. In terms of the sheer particularity of 
our remembered episodes, Steven Pinker was probably closer to the 
mark with a further flowering of ws: “who did what to whom, what 
is true of what, where, when and why.”2 More intangible, though, 
is the subjective quality of episodic memory, the sense that we are 
mentally reliving the past. There is as yet no established way of 
measuring that in another species. The problem is compounded 
if we add mental time travel into the future. Our mental lives are 
stretched in time, whereas other animals, as far as we know, live 
mainly in the present.
The difficulty of showing that nonhuman animals do have epi­
sodic memories or imagined futures, then, stands in marked con­
trast to the ease with which we can probe these capacities in hu­
mans. Indeed it is often difficult to prevent people from divulging 
their past exploits, whether a recent trip to Spain or a hole-by-hole 
account of a round of golf. Similarly, our friends are often only too 
ready to divulge their plans for some future business venture or ro­
mantic conquest. In the evolution of our species, then, language and 
mental time travel seem to be linked. Language may have evolved  
precisely so that we can share our mental travels through time, 
and the absence of language in other species may stem from the 
absence of mental time travel itself.
Despite the tedium of hearing in detail about someone else’s 
bridge evening, the sharing of our pasts and futures is almost cer­
tainly adaptive. Even golfers may benefit from golfing stories—it’s 
only the duffer who must occasionally suffer. If episodic memory 
evolved to enable us to plan our futures, and choose between alter­
natives, then we can only benefit if we add the experiences of oth­
ers to our own. We humans seem to have an inordinate interest in 
the lives of others, whether from the gossip of our friends or the 
tabloid press. To be valuable, moreover, episodes need not be based 
on fact, and most of us are also addicted to television soaps, op­
eras, movies, novels—even just-so stories.3 Skilled storytellers can 
create fictional episodes that tell us much about the human condi­
tion. The universal predilection for murder mysteries, for example, 
may help us understand the vagaries, and perhaps deviousness, of 

114   chapter 7
human behavior—but more of that later. As a graduate student 
in psychology at McGill University in Montreal, I took a compul­
sory seminar with the legendary Donald O. Hebb, Canada’s most 
famous psychologist, who used to tell us that you could learn 
more about human relations from reading novels than from tak­
ing courses in psychology.4 (I stayed with the course.) 
I think that grammatical language evolved primarily to enable 
us to share episodes, thus greatly enlarging the vocabulary of real-
world happenings for the construction of personal futures.5 This 
provides a vast resource of information about how people behave. 
Since this information is shared, it also creates cultural expectations  
and templates for future planning. Of course language is also used 
to communicate semantic information, as indeed I am attempting 
to do in this book, but the initial impetus, I suggest, came from the 
emergence of episodic memory, mental time travel, and the sense of 
time. And although episodic memories may require a foundation 
of semantic memory,6 semantic memory in turn is no doubt shaped 
and extended through the accumulation of episodic memories.
Several of the critical properties of language, then, probably 
evolved from the relaying of events, whether past, present, future, 
or fictional, most of them located at times other than the present, in­
cluding imaginary time. Other times also means other places, since  
we are peripatetic creatures, restlessly moving about the planet—
and occasionally off it. Language is exquisitely designed to com­
municate “who did what to whom, what is true of what, where, 
when and why,” to quote Pinker again—this time in the context he 
intended. 
What, then, are the properties of language that allow us to do 
this?
Symbolic Representation
The first requirement is that we need ways to refer to objects, ac­
tions, qualities, and so forth that are not physically present, and 
cannot be referred to by pointing, or by shared attention—as when 
two people are both looking at the same painting, or listening to 

the grammar of time   115
the same piece of music. That is, referring to the not-physically- 
present requires symbols. This in turn requires double coding. We 
need first a set of internally stored concepts, and second a list of 
communicable symbols to refer to them. It does not really matter 
what the symbols are, so long as they are sufficiently distinct to 
avoid confusions among them. 
In chapter 4, I referred to Ferdinand de Saussure’s view that lan­
guage is by definition composed of signs that are arbitrary, rather  
than iconic or onomatopoeic. I argued there, contrary to Saussure, 
that the use of arbitrary symbols derives from practical concerns 
rather than linguistic necessity. Relative to speech, signed lan­
guages allow greater use of symbols whose form gives a physical 
clue to what they refer to, since signed languages operate in a vi­
sual medium, and most of the things we talk about, whether ob­
jects or actions, can be described visually rather than acoustically. 
But even in signed languages the symbols tend to become conven­
tionalized and lose their pictorial aspect. And although a picture 
may be worth a thousand words, pictures take too much time to 
construct for efficient communication, especially with our limited 
bodily resources. The associations we form between symbols and 
concepts are also sufficiently rich to allow the symbols themselves 
to be a kind of shorthand. In referring to different kinds of dog, 
for example, labels are sufficient to conjure up the appropriate 
images; the mind, not the symbol, does the work. Thus the words 
beagle, dachshund, and collie bear no relation to these varieties 
of dog, or even to each other, but you can picture what each of 
them looks like, and if you’re a dog lover conjure up their other 
characteristics. 
In the interests of speed and efficiency, moreover, more frequent 
words tend to be shorter. This is captured by Zipf’s law, which 
states that the length of a word is inversely proportional to its rank 
in frequency. The reason for this is evident from the title of Zipf’s 
1949 book, Human Behavior and the Principle of Least-Effort. 
Language calibrates itself so as to require as little effort as possible, 
and words tend to grow progressively shorter as they become more 
common. Hence we have the progression from television to telly to 
TV, or in my own country from university to varsity to uni.

116   chapter 7
Of course with modern technology, pictures can indeed replace 
words or signs, at least in some contexts. A video of one’s vacation 
in Europe may even be more effective than a verbal account, but 
does not provide the to-and-fro possibilities for conversation. A 
more serious threat, perhaps, comes from texting, with its increas­
ing short-cuts and rapid ways of taking and sending digital photos. 
Texting restores the advantage of being able to communicate at a 
distance to the hands, at the expense of the mouth, and may well 
soon become the conversational medium of choice. Thus if lan­
guage progressed from hand to mouth, as I argued in chap­ter 4, we 
may now be witnessing a switch back again. 
As we saw in chapter 3, the use of symbols is not exclusive to 
humans. Great apes have been taught to communicate using ges­
tures or visual symbols (constructed by humans), and chimpanzees 
in the wild emit pant hoot calls to signal the discovery of food. 
Vervet monkeys use different calls to warn of different predators. 
But we humans are unmatched in the number of symbols we use. 
The time dimension vastly increases the mental canvas, since refer­
ence to different times generally involves different places, differ­
ent actions, different actors, and so on. Steven Pinker estimates 
that the average literate person stores about 50,000 concepts,7 and 
requires the same number of words in order to refer to them. There 
are probably qualitative differences as well. Terrence Deacon refers  
to us humans as “the symbolic species,”8 and points out that the 
symbols we use have been wrested away from simple association 
with their referents, and are used flexibly in human thought. Thus 
words can bring to mind other words, and can be used freely in the 
absence of what they refer to. Again, this is due in part to the hu­
man sense of time, and the ability to use symbols to evoke events 
from the past, or imagined future events.
A clue to the origin of reference to absent entities comes from a 
study comparing 12-month-old infants with chimpanzees.9 In dif­
ferent but comparable settings, the babies and the chimps first re­
peatedly watched a human adult place desired objects (toys for the 
babies, food for the chimps) on one platform, and undesired objects 
(paper towel for the babies, bedding material for the chimps) on 
another similar platform. The participants were then tested under 

the grammar of time   117
two conditions. In one, the adult brought out the desired object 
and placed it under its platform so the participant couldn’t actually 
see it. The majority of both the babies and the chimps pointed to 
the platform where the object was hidden, thereby prompting the  
adult to give them the object. In the second condition, the plat­
forms were left empty. The majority of the babies still pointed to 
the platform where the desirable object had been, but the chimpan­
zees did not, despite evidently wanting to get food. Even by one 
year of age, human infants may have beginnings of displaced ref­
erence; or the ability to refer to objects that are not present, but 
chimpanzees, our closest nonhuman relatives, apparently do not.
Marking Time
Languages have also evolved means of indicating the time at which 
an event took place. In many languages this is achieved by marking 
verbs according to tense. This can be more complex than merely 
indicating past, present, or future. We can also distinguish perfect  
tenses, referring to actions that are completed relative to the pres­
ent, from the so-called imperfect ones, which refer to actions not 
yet complete. Thus I had been to town is the past perfect, distin­
guishable from the past imperfect I was going to town. Both are 
distinguishable from the simple past, I went to town. The future 
perfect works likewise: I will go to town is simple future, I will 
have gone to town is future perfect, and I will be going to town 
is future imperfect. We can also use different moods, such as the 
conditional to indicate hypothetical events, or the subjunctive to 
indicate events that are conditional on wishes or emotions, or 
conditions that do not apply at the present. In English, we make 
extensive use of auxiliaries, such as the variants of go and have, 
to indicate tense, but we also attach morphemes (units of mean­
ing) to the verbs themselves, such as -ed to indicate the past and 
-ing to indicate ongoing action. Anyone who has learned a lan­
guage such as Latin will know that verbs in that language are 
awash with different morphemes that have to do with time and its  
uncertainties.

118   chapter 7
In some languages, though, the verbs are without tense, and time 
is marked in other ways. Chinese, for example, has no tense, but 
the time of an event can be indicated by adverbs, such as tomor-
row, and what are called aspectual markers, such as the word be-
fore in a sentence that might be roughly rendered as He break his 
leg before.10 In English, too, we can use adverbs, such as yesterday 
and tomorrow, and other markers to specify time more precisely. 
These include clock times. The first aircraft to hit the Twin Towers 
in New York City struck at 8:46 a.m. on 11 September 2001. In 
our increasingly frantic lives, the precise time of events, past and 
future, is of great importance.11
Of course, referring to episodes at different points in time gener­
ally involves different places—what I did yesterday need not have 
taken place in where I am today or will be tomorrow. So long as 
communication involves only the present, place can be communi­
cated largely by pointing or by the mere fact of shared location, but  
reference to places at other times itself requires an extensive sym­
bolic vocabulary. So it is that we have names for countries, states, 
provinces, cities, towns, streets, houses, rooms. There are also 
landmarks such as mountains, lakes, rivers, forests, specific build­
ings such as museums, town halls, theaters, and the like. Terms  
to locate places relative to other places and landmarks are also 
needed, and include the compass directions north, south, east, and 
west, and relative terms such as left and right, near and far, above 
and below. Precision is achieved by the use of measured distance, 
whether in miles, kilometers, inches, millimeters. Or light years, 
which also incorporate the sense of time.
Language does not merely allow people to share episodes, it can 
also transport them mentally to different times and places. This re­
quires a distinction between what have been called reference time, 
or the time referred to in the narrative, and speech time, the time 
at which the speaker is speaking.12 Both of these may differ from 
present time if one is recalling a story told on a previous occasion. 
Each of these times, moreover, may locate both listener and narra­
tor in different places. You may recall being told yesterday of X’s 
adventures in China a year ago, or of Y’s plans for her daughter’s 

the grammar of time   119
wedding. The complex set of mental perspectives requires multiple 
recursive embedding, which people accomplish with ease. Our lives 
are replete with devices to take us into different worlds at different 
times, whether books, plays, movies, or soap operas.
Since the understanding of space long preceded mental time 
travel, it is perhaps not surprising that terms relating to time have 
largely piggybacked on spatial terms. American Sign Language 
(ASL) makes use of an implicit time-line from the back of the body 
to the front, with the future in front and the past behind. Even in 
spoken languages, there is typically an implicit spatial dimension  
underlying our sense of time. As in ASL, English refers to the past 
as behind us and the future as in front, and most of our spatial 
pronouns, such as about, after, around, before, by, in, near, far, to­
ward, with, and so on, refer to time as well as space. In the lan­
guage of the Aymara, residents of the Andes, time runs the other 
way, with the past in front and the future behind; thus the ex­
pression for last year is nayra mara, literally front year, and the 
expression for a future day is quipüru, literally behind day.13 Their 
gestures about events in time conform to this arrangement. In Chi­
nese, time is represented vertically, and travels downwards, so that 
the month above means last month.14 
The importance of time in the shaping of language is nicely illus­
trated by the Pirahã, the Amazonian tribe in Brazil we encountered 
in chapter 2. Their language is almost devoid of tense and time 
markers. Verbs are merely marked to indicate whether an action 
is within the speaker’s immediate experience (“proximate”) or not 
(“remote’), but there is otherwise no tense. There are a few words 
indicating different times, such as those roughly translatable as 
another day, now, already, night, low water, high water, full moon, 
noon, sunset, and a few others.15 The limited ability to refer to 
other points in time is mirrored by their actual experience of time. 
As we saw in chapter 2, they have no fiction or myths.16 Their kin­
ship system is among the simplest ever recorded, and once they die, 
relatives are forgotten. Everett could find no individual who could 
name his or her great-grandparents, and very few who could name 
all four grandparents. Among the events that feature in their lives 

120   chapter 7
are the arrival and departure of boats on the river, often carrying 
traders. These events seem to exist in the present without passing 
into memory. Everett writes as follows: 
Pirahã’s excitement at seeing a canoe go round a river bend is hard to 
describe; they see this almost as travelling into another dimension. It is 
interesting, in the light of the postulated cultural constraint on gram­
mar, that there is an important term for crossing the border between 
experience and nonexperience.17
Benjamin Lee Whorf argued that examples like this reflected the 
influence of language on thought itself, an idea that impressed the 
linguist Edward Sapir and has become known as the Sapir-Whorf 
hypothesis. Whorf was especially interested in Native American 
languages, and noted that the Hopi language “is seen to contain no 
words, grammatical forms, constructions or expressions that refer 
directly to what we call ‘time,’ or to past, present or future.”18 It 
turns out that Whorf was wrong about this, as later work by Ekke­
hart Malotki showed the Hopi to have multiple ways of talking 
about time, including the use of tense.19 It is in any case more in 
keeping with this chapter to suppose that language reflects thought, 
rather than vice versa. That is, the Pirahã have only limited ways to 
talk about time because they live largely in the present.20
As we saw in chapter 2, there are other ways in which Pirahã lan­
guage is limited. It has no numbers or system of counting, no color 
terms, and may even be said to lack verbs, in the sense of a verb  
as a linguistic class; the Pirahã learn verbs one by one as individual 
entities. As we saw in chapter 4, the Pirahã also make do with 
fewer phonemes than any other language group.
The example of the Pirahã adds to the evidence that grammati­
cal language is indeed a consequence of the understanding of time, 
and the ability to travel mentally in time. Without the burden of 
time, language may well be free to develop in other directions. For  
example, Everett notes that the Pirahã communicate almost as 
much by singing, whistling, and humming, and have very rich pros­
ody, with a five-way distinction between syllable types. And they  
can also lie and tell jokes, two indispensable human attributes. 

the grammar of time   121
They have much more to communicate about than boring rounds 
of golf. 
Generativity
The most distinctive property of language is that it is generative. We 
can both construct and understand sentences that we have never  
used or heard before. 
A classic example comes from the British philosopher Alfred 
North Whitehead. In 1934 he had been seated at dinner next to 
the psychologist B. F. Skinner, who was trying to explain how be­
haviorism would change the face of psychology. In Skinner’s view, 
sentences were learned sequences, built up from the principles of 
operant conditioning. Obliged to challenge this view, Whitehead 
uttered the sentence “No black scorpion is falling upon this table,” 
and asked Skinner to explain the behavioral principles that might 
have led him to say that. It was not until the publication of Verbal 
Behavior 23 years later that Skinner attempted an answer.21 In 
an appendix to that book, Skinner proposed that Whitehead was 
unconsciously expressing the fear that behaviorism might indeed 
take over, likening it to a black scorpion that he would not allow 
to tarnish his philosophy. Skinner’s explanation is ironic, because 
it seems to owe more to psychoanalysis than to behaviorism, and 
Skinner was well known for anti-Freudian views.22
We now know, largely through the efforts of Noam Chomsky, 
that language cannot be explained in terms of learned sequences.23 
Instead, it depends on rules, as explained in chapter 2. These rules 
combine words in precise ways to enable us to extract meaning. As 
the German philosopher Gottlob Frege put it:
The possibility of our understanding sentences that we have never 
heard before rests evidently on this, that we can construct the sense of 
a sentence out of parts that correspond to words.24
The combinatorial structure of sentences, I suggest, derives in 
large part from the combinatorial structure of episodes, and words 

122   chapter 7
provide the access to the components of episodes. Most of the epi­
sodes we witness, remember, or construct in our minds are combi­
nations of the familiar. Indeed it is the combinations, rather than 
the individual elements, that make individual episodes distinct. In 
Whitehead’s sentence, the notion of a black scorpion, falling, and 
a table are of themselves of less interest than the unusual combi­
nation of a scorpion in downward motion above the very table at 
which the two savants sat—and there may have been relief that this  
unusual event was not occurring. The manner in which the words 
describing such episodes are arranged depends on the conventions 
that make up grammar.
One such convention has to do with the order in which words 
are uttered or signed. The most basic episodes are those involving  
objects and actions, so the first “words” were probably nouns and 
verbs—an idea championed by the eighteenth-century English 
philologist John Horne Tooke, who regarded nouns and verbs as 
“necessary words.”25 The prototypical episode of someone doing 
something to someone or something else, then, requires one noun 
to be the subject, another to be a verb describing the action, and an­
other noun to be the object of the action. How these are ordered is  
simply a matter of convention. In English, the convention is to 
place them in the order subject verb object (SVO). To use a well-
chewed example, the sentence “Dog bites man” means something 
very different from “Man bites dog”; the latter is news, the former 
simply a personal misfortune—or perhaps triumph, from the dog’s 
point of view. Among the world’s languages, the most common 
word order is SOV, with the verb at the end. SOV languages range 
from Ainu to Yukaghir. Indeed all possible combinations seem to 
exist among the world’s languages, although I’m told there are 
only four OSV languages.26 
Since we can only utter one word at a time, word order can be 
critical in speech. Some languages, though, mark the roles played 
by different words with changes to the words themselves. In Latin, 
for example, the subject and object of a sentence are signaled by 
different inflections—changes to the end of the word—and the 
words can be reordered without losing the meaning. So canis virum 
mordet means Dog bites man, while canem vir mordet means Man 

the grammar of time   123
bites dog, although it would be normal still to place the subject first.  
The Australian aboriginal language Walpiri is a more extreme ex­
ample of an inflected language in which word order makes essen­
tially no difference. Such languages are sometimes called scram-
bling languages. Chinese, by contrast, is an example of an isolating 
language, in which words are not inflected and different mean­
ings are created by adding words or altering word order. English is 
closer to being an isolating language than a scrambling one.
Compared to speech, signed languages are not so constrained to 
present words in sequence, since they make use of spatial informa­
tion as well as sequential information. Consider an action such as 
a cow jumping over the moon. Since the cow, the jumping, and the 
moon are all present in the action, we need a convention in speech 
to determine how to order them; English is an SVO language, and 
the ordering is cow, jump, moon: The cow jumped over the moon. 
In signing, though, one could pantomime the action by having 
one hand represent a cow, the other the moon, and have the cow 
hand make a jumping movement over the moon hand. Even signed 
languages, though, need conventions about order. As they evolve, 
signed languages tend toward segmentation and linearization; as 
we saw in chapter 2, children using NSL segmented the motion 
of a ball into two separate signs, and signed them separately. Seg­
mentation provides for a more efficient combinatorial structure, al­
lowing the same signs to be used in different combinations. Thus 
signing an action like a cow jumping over the moon tends to seg­
ment into separate signs for cow, jump, and moon, just as it does in 
speech. In American Sign Language the basic order is SVO, while 
the newly emerged Al-Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language (ABSL) is an 
SOV language.27 
Of course there is more to episodes than simple if painful ac­
tions like dogs biting men, and correspondingly more to language. 
We need to record such things as whether it was a particular dog, 
or just some unfriendly or perhaps hungry animal that happened 
to be passing by. The definite article the (related to that) is used to 
specify a particular object or person, while the indefinite article a 
or an (related to one) refers to an object or person not specified 
or particularized. We may need also to record further detail about 

124   chapter 7
the dog, or the man, or perhaps even the nature or location of the 
bite. Many of the operations of grammaticalization, discussed in 
chapter 2, are driven by considerations of this sort. For example, 
embedded phrases may qualify the people or objects involved in an 
episode, as in sentences like The dog, which had previously bitten 
my aunt, bit the postman.
Once upon a Time
Episodic memories, along with combinatorial rules, allow us not 
only to create and communicate possible episodes in the future, 
but also to create fictional episodes. As a species, we are unique in 
telling stories. Indeed the dividing line between memory and fiction 
is blurred; every fictional story contains elements of memory, and 
many memories contain elements of fiction. Stories may be set in the 
past, as in historical fiction, or in the future, as in prophetic books 
such as George Orwell’s 1984 (a date now thankfully in the past), 
or they may be set in some unspecified period of time. Of course  
stories also carry their own ribbon of time. Relative to any given 
point in a novel, there is a past and a future, although the author 
has the luxury of being able to flit back and forth between them 
at her whim.
Stories are adaptive because they allow us to go beyond personal  
experience to what might have been, or to what might be in the 
future. They provide a way of stretching and sharing experience so 
that we are better adapted to possible futures. Moreover, stories 
tend to become institutionalized, ensuring that shared information 
extends through large sections of the community, creating con­
formity and social cohesion. Examples include the Bible, the Ko­
ran, J. K. Rowling’s Harry Potter stories, and popular soap operas.  
Even the near-universal predilection for murder mysteries may 
have adaptive significance. They alert us to events that might hap­
pen (but we hope they won’t), and so provide scenarios that might 
follow if they do, and make us better prepared to deal with them. 
And the murderer nearly always gets caught.28 This means that 

the grammar of time   125
murder stories are morality tales, helping inculcate a sense of what 
one should and should not do. There is of course a dark side as 
well. By exposing the mistakes that lead to the murderer being 
caught, murder mysteries may help the readers themselves get 
away with murder.29 
Not all fiction is murderous. Stories also allow us to understand 
more generally what goes on in the minds of others, so that we 
can better understand their motivations and actions. This is im­
portant for social understanding, helping us to achieve joint goals. 
But fiction also extends beyond the ordinary, including characters 
that transcend normal human capabilities. The Bible is but one 
example, and perhaps historically the most influential of all. Chil­
dren’s stories, in particular, are alive with talking animals, fairies, 
magicians, and other supernatural beings,30 as is well illustrated by 
the extraordinary success of the Harry Potter series. Is the super­
natural adaptive? Perhaps the stretching of the imagination allows 
us to better understand what might be possible. The evolutionary 
biologist David Sloan Wilson remarks that “Even massively ficti­
tious beliefs can be adaptive, as long as they motivate behaviors 
that are adaptive in the real world.”31 
Stories about the supernatural morph naturally into religion. 
Brian Boyd points out that religious conviction derives less from 
doctrine than from stories.32 Like other religious works, the Bible 
tells stories of such supernatural incidents as virgin birth, walking 
on water, or rising from the dead. As Boyd notes, evolution will 
favor belief in a falsehood if it motivates more adaptive behav­
ior than does belief in a truth.33 One falsehood34 that is perhaps 
encouraged by tales of the supernatural is the notion of life after 
death; as suggested in the previous chapter, belief in the afterlife 
can alleviate the fear of death and subsequent oblivion, and the 
belief is no doubt fortified if expressed in stories that are widely 
shared. More generally, the adaptiveness of stories about the su­
pernatural may derive from their sheer power to spread through­
out a culture, engendering social cohesion. As Boyd puts it, “We 
may even see reluctance to believe as a challenge to group unity 
and as tantamount to treason.”35

126   chapter 7
Beyond Time
The main argument of this chapter is that grammatical language 
evolved to enable us to communicate about events that do not 
take place in the here and now. We talk about episodes in the 
past, imagined or planned episodes in the future, or indeed purely 
imaginary episodes in the form of stories. Stories may extend be­
yond individual episodes, and involve multiple episodes that may 
switch back and forth in time. The unique properties of grammar, 
then, may have originated in the uniqueness of human mental time 
travel.
But the structure of language itself is not a matter of mental time 
travel. Words are stored in semantic memory, and only rarely or 
transiently in episodic memory. I have very little memory of the oc­
casions on which I learned the meanings of the some 50,000 words 
that I know—although I can remember occasionally looking up 
obscure words that I didn’t know, or that had escaped my semantic 
memory. The grammatical rules by which we string words together 
may be regarded as part of implicit rather than explicit memory, as 
automatic, perhaps, as riding a bicycle. Indeed so automatic are the 
rules of grammar that linguists have still not been able to elaborate 
all of them explicitly. Thus although language may have evolved, 
initially at least, for the communication of episodic information, 
it is itself a robust system embedded in the more secure vaults of 
semantic and implicit memory. It has taken over large areas of our 
memory systems, and indeed our brains.
And although language may have been initiated by the adap­
tive advantage of sharing our episodic experiences, we have also 
adapted language for a variety of other purposes. One such pur­
pose is teaching. Indeed this book is an attempt to explain to you 
some of the things I believe to be true of the human mind, and 
contains little of my own personal experiences—although I have 
occasionally indulged, but not, I hope, to the point of boring you. 
The pedagogical use of language may have developed with the 
emergence of manufacturing techniques. In chapter 4 I suggested 
that language shifted from a predominantly manual mode to a  

the grammar of time   127
predominantly vocal one relatively late in the evolution of our spe­
cies since we shared a common ancestor with the chimpanzee, some 
six or seven million years ago. Indeed in chapter 12 I explore the 
possibility that the shift was not complete until the emergence of 
Homo sapiens, which may explain the surge of manufacture in our  
own species. So pedagogy began to encroach on the use of language  
for the telling of stories. We use language to explain how things 
work, or how to cook, as on popular cooking shows on television. 
But still we gossip.
In this chapter I have suggested, in effect, that the recursive na­
ture of language evolved, at least in part, from the recursive nature 
of mental time travel. Recursive language structures need not map 
directly onto the recursive nature of imagined episodes. As we saw 
in chapter 2, the Pirahã use nonrecursive structures to recount re­
cursive episodes. Conversely, a sentence may include an embedded 
phrase that has nothing to do with an episode itself, but may sim­
ply provide background information, as in a sentence like George, 
who has a generous disposition, gave most of his money to his 
avaricious daughters. So it goes.
Mental time travel, though, is not the only recursive function 
that has a bearing on the evolution of language. In the next chap­
ter, I expand on another recursive property of the human mind that  
also played a critical role in the evolution of language.


Part 3
Theory of Mind
Another ingredient of human thought is the ability to understand, 
or infer, what is in the minds of other people. This is again recur­
sive, since I might not only infer what another individual is think­
ing, but also infer that she infers what I am thinking. As I sug­
gest in chapter 8, mind reading is not the product of extrasensory 
perception or psychic emanations, but is rather a mental process, 
dependent on common situations, shared experience, and an un­
derstanding that other minds are like our own. Mind reading is 
critical to human cooperation, but may also underlie some of our 
more deceitful practices, such as lying, stealing, and cheating. Be­
lieve me. 
As I explain in chapter 9, language depends critically on theory 
of mind. Indeed it is itself one of the mechanisms by which we read 
the minds of others. Unlike animals calls, which consist of relatively  
fixed signals, language is intrinsically ambiguous, and meaning 
must be inferred not only from what a person says (or signs), but 
also from what one knows about that person and what one shares 
with her. A conversation is more a shared stream of thought than 
the transmission of information, and can often be carried on with 
a minimal use of words.
This part of the book continues the theme that language is not so 
much an independent biological faculty as part of a more general 
cognitive capacity—in this case the capacity to share our thoughts 
and emotions. The social nature of language is one reason that no 
one has yet succeeded in having meaningful conversations with a 
computer. Perhaps we might make an exception of ELIZA, the fa­
mous computer program that simulated Rogerian psychotherapy, 
which essentially operated by using stock phrases triggered by key 
words in the patient’s utterances. Well, maybe some conversations 
are a bit like that, but I like to think that even psychotherapy may 
have evolved into something a little more meaningful.


8
Mind Reading
There are three classes of intellects: one which comprehends by itself; 
another which appreciates what others comprehend; and a third which 
neither comprehends by itself nor by the showing of others; the first is 
the most excellent, the second is good, and the third is useless. 
—Niccolò Machiavelli, The Prince
Many people believe that thoughts can be transferred from one 
person to another by means other than the senses. This is known 
as telepathy. In 1882, the Society for Psychical Research was estab­
lished in London to investigate telepathy and other so-called psy­
chic phenomena, such as ghosts, trance states, levitations, mediums, 
and communication with the dead. Its first president was Henry 
Sidgwick, later professor of moral philosophy at Trinity College, 
Cambridge, and other distinguished members included the experi­
mental physicist Lord Rayleigh, the philosopher Arthur Balfour, 
who became prime minister of England from 1902 to 1905, and 
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, author of the Sherlock Holmes stories. 
The Society attracted the interest of famous psychologists such as 
Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung, and the pioneering American psy­
chologist William James was so impressed that he established the 
American Society for Psychical Research shortly afterwards. 
These societies, and many others dedicated to psychical research, 
remain active to this day. Laboratories for the study of psychic 
phenomena emerged in a number of universities, with Stanford 
University leading the way in 1911. Under the guidance of the 
famous psychologist William McDougall, Duke University set up 
an influential laboratory in 1930, and the publication of Joseph B. 
Rhine’s book New Frontiers of the Mind in 1937 brought the lab­
oratory’s findings to the attention of the general public. Rhine and 

132   chapter 8
McDougall coined the term “parapsychology” to refer to psychic 
phenomenon, and the Journal of Parapsychology, which flourishes 
still, was established in 1937. In 1983, the noted author Arthur 
Koestler and his wife Cynthia provided in their wills for the estab­
lishment of a chair in parapsychology at a British university. The 
University of Edinburgh took advantage of the opportunity, and in 
1984 the chair was duly established there, with Robert Morris as 
its first incumbent. Morris died in 2005, and at the time of writing 
has not been replaced, although the Koestler Parapsychology Unit 
remains active. 
As this brief introduction illustrates, parapsychology has been 
associated with some distinguished individuals and reputable uni­
versities. The tenuous nature of claims of psychic phenomena has 
also meant that fraudsters have been quick to cash in. Uri Geller, 
an Israeli-British stage performer, rose to fame in the 1970s for 
television shows on which he claimed to demonstrate psychic pow­
ers. He is perhaps best known for his prowess at bending spoons, 
apparently through the power of thought—a phenomenon that, if 
true, is an example of psychokinesis. Geller’s demonstrations are 
easily duplicated without resort to psychic powers by stage ma­
gicians, including James Randi, who wrote a book entitled The 
Magic of Uri Geller—it was later called The Truth about Geller.1 
Geller’s exploits were also unmasked, leaving no spoon unbent, 
in New Zealand by two psychologists, David Marks and Richard 
Kammann, who were able to repeat Geller’s demonstrations on 
television, again without any claim to psychic powers. They too 
wrote a book exposing the field of psychic phenomena, and Geller 
in particular, entitled The Psychology of the Psychic.2 These books 
are highly recommended, but alas do not have the selling power of 
books that proclaim the existence of the psychic.
Just why people should be so ready to believe in the power of 
the mind to transcend physical laws is unclear. Perhaps it is a kind 
of wish fulfillment, allowing us to believe that we can influence 
people at a distance or communicate with loved ones who have 
died. Perhaps it is an offshoot of mind-body dualism, attributed to 
the seventeenth-century French philosopher R né Descartes, who  
proposed that the human mind was not governed solely by physical  
e

mind reading   133
laws. Most religions depend on the idea of a spirit or god that goes 
beyond the merely physical. Some devotees have tried to give sci­
entific respectability to psychic forces through labeling; parapsy­
chologists have called it psi (pronounced “sigh”), which to more 
mainstream scientists, albeit old-fashioned ones, means “pounds 
per square inch,” while a more ambitious term, coined by the bi­
ologist Rupert Sheldrake, is morphic resonance. Sheldrake is the 
fellow we met in chapter 3 who recently claimed that dogs can use 
morphic resonance to sense when their owners are coming home 
unexpectedly.3 
Theory of Mind
Part of the reason that the belief in psychic phenomena persists, 
though, is that people are actually very good at reading minds. We 
do this through means that are entirely naturalistic, and there is no 
good reason to invoke supernatural powers or nonphysical chan­
nels of communication. The ability to understand, or at least sur­
mise, what is happening in the minds of others is known as theory 
of mind. It is recursive, in the sense that it involves the insertion 
of what you believe to be someone else’s state of mind into your 
own. Let’s consider, then, some of the naturalistic ways in which 
we can do this.
Emotion is perhaps the simplest mental state to read. We can 
readily tell whether another person is happy, angry, sad, or in pain, 
through their facial expressions, bodily postures, or vocalizations. 
In his book The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, 
Charles Darwin vividly described outward signs of emotions, and 
our ability to read the emotions of others is by no means confined 
to our own species. Darwin was equivocal, though, about whether 
this was learned or instinctive; as is usually the case, he is worth 
quoting in detail:
As most of the movements of expression must have been gradually ac­
quired, afterwards becoming instinctive, there seems to be some degree 
of a priori probability that their recognition would likewise have be­
come instinctive. There is, at least, no greater difficulty in believing this 

134   chapter 8
than in admitting that, when a female quadruped first bears young, she 
knows the cry of distress of her offspring, or than in admitting that 
many animals instinctively recognize and fear their enemies; and of 
both these statements there can be no reasonable doubt. It is however 
extremely difficult to prove that our children instinctively recognize 
any expression. I attended to this point in my first-born infant, who 
could not have learnt anything by associating with other children, and 
I was convinced that he understood a smile and received pleasure from 
seeing one, answering it by another, at much too early an age to have 
learnt anything by experience. When this child was about four months 
old, I made in his presence many odd noises and strange grimaces, 
and tried to look savage; but the noises, if not too loud, as well as the 
grimaces, were all taken as good jokes; and I attributed this at the time 
to their being preceded or accompanied by smiles. When five months 
old, he seemed to understand a compassionate expression and tone 
of voice. When a few days over six months old, his nurse pretended 
to cry, and I saw that his face instantly assumed a melancholy expres­
sion, with the corners of the mouth strongly depressed; now this child 
could rarely have seen any other child crying, and never a grown-up 
person crying, and I should doubt whether at so early an age he could 
have reasoned on the subject. Therefore it seems to me that an innate 
feeling must have told him that the pretended crying of his nurse ex­
pressed grief; and this through the instinct of sympathy excited grief  
in him.4
Whether instinctive or learned, the human ability to infer the 
mental states of others goes well beyond the detection of emo­
tion. To take another simple and seemingly obvious example, we 
can understand what another individual can see. This is again an 
example of recursion, since we can insert that individual’s experi­
ence into our own. It is by no means a trivial feat, since it requires 
the mental rotation and transformation of visual scenes to match 
what the other person can see, and the construction of visual 
scenes that are not immediately visible. For example, if you are 
talking to someone face-to-face, you know that she can see what 
is behind you, though you can’t. Someone standing in a different 
location necessarily sees the world from a different angle, and to 

mind reading   135
understand that person’s view requires an act of mental rotation 
and translation. 
To test this ability in children, the Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget 
developed what is known as the Three Mountains Test, in which 
the children looked at an arrangement of three model mountains 
from a particular location in the room. They were then shown 
photographs of the scene taken from different locations, and asked 
to select which one showed how the scene would look from some 
particular location. Piaget found that up to the age of nine or ten, 
children were unable to solve the problem when the photograph 
represented the view from a location other than their own.5 This 
particular task seems to have been unusually difficult, though, and 
children as young as three or four have been shown to be able to 
solve a comparable task in which the mountains are replaced by 
more familiar objects.6
More complex still is the capacity to infer what other people 
believe, often on the basis of observation and reasoning. This is 
nicely illustrated by the Sally-Anne test, which is a test of children’s 
ability to infer false beliefs. The child is shown a scene involving 
two dolls, one called Sally and one called Anne. Sally has a basket 
and Anne has a box. Sally then puts a marble in her basket and 
leaves the scene. While Sally is away Anne takes the marble out of 
the basket and puts it in her box. Sally then comes back, and the 
child is asked where she will look for her marble. Children under 
the age of four typically say she will look in the box, which is 
where the marble actually is. Older children will understand that 
Sally did not see the marble being shifted, and will correctly say 
that Sally will look in the basket. They understand that Sally has 
a false belief.
The Sally-Anne test is something of a classic in developmental  
psychology, but may overestimate the age at which children de­
velop theory of mind. The test requires not only that the child re­
member a series of events, but also that the child understand the 
question put to her. A recent study suggests that babies may actu­
ally understand false belief by the age of two. Children aged 25 
months were shown a movie of an actor placing a ball in a box. 
The actor then looks away and the ball is removed. When the actor 

136   chapter 8
returned, 17 of the 20 infants looked at the box where the ball had 
been placed, evidently expecting the actor to mistakenly look there 
for the ball. These young infants did seem to understand that the 
actor would have a false belief.7 
Theory of mind evolved because we live complex social lives, 
where we deal as much with people as with objects—or we did, 
until computers appeared on our desks. Survival during the Pleisto­
cene, when our forebears competed with dangerous carnivores on 
the African savanna, required cooperation and social intelligence.  
The story of the Pleistocene in shaping the human mind will be 
told in more detail in chapter 11, but suffice to say that reproduc­
tive success in humans is driven more by social success than by 
physical attributes.8 
There may be a dark side to social intelligence, though, since some  
unscrupulous individuals may take advantage of the cooperative 
efforts of others, without themselves contributing. These individu­
als are known as freeloaders. In order to counteract their behavior, 
we have evolved ways of detecting them. Evolutionary psycholo­
gists refer to a “cheater-detection module” in the brain that en­
ables us to detect these imposters, but they in turn have developed 
more sophisticated techniques to escape detection.9 This recursive 
sequence of cheater detection and cheater-detection detection has 
led to what has been called a “cognitive arms race,” perhaps first 
identified by the British evolutionary theorist Robert Trivers,10 
and later amplified by evolutionary psychologists.11 The ability to 
take advantage of others through such recursive thinking has been 
termed Machiavellian intelligence,12 whereby we use social strate­
gies not merely to cooperate with our fellows, but also to outwit 
and deceive them. In the sixteenth century, in his celebrated work 
The Prince, Niccolò Machiavelli gave sage advice:
[It] is useful, for example, to appear merciful, trustworthy, blameless, 
religious—and to be so—yet to be in such measure prepared in mind 
that if you need to be not so, you can and do change to the contrary.
The philosopher Daniel Dennett referred to mind reading as the  
intentional stance, which means that we tend to treat people as 
having intentional states.13 The notion of intentional state is here 

mind reading   137
used rather broadly, and not just the intention to act in a particu­
lar way. It includes other subjective states such as beliefs, desires, 
thoughts, hopes, fears, and so forth. According to the intentional 
stance, we interact with people according to what we think is go­
ing on in their minds, rather than in terms of their physical at­
tributes—although there is a bit of that too, as I recall from my 
early days on the rugby field. When you meet a stranger on a 
dark night, your behavior may be guided partly by the intentional 
stance, based perhaps on facial expression, but perhaps also by 
what might be termed the physical stance, based on just how big a 
hunk the stranger is. 
From the point of view of this book, the important aspect of 
theory of mind is that it is recursive. This is captured by the differ­
ent orders of intentionality proposed by Dennett. Zero-order in­
tentionality refers to actions or behaviors that imply no subjective 
state, as in reflex or automatic acts. First-order intentionality in­
volves a single subjective term, as in Alice wants Fred to go away. 
Second-order intentionality would involve two such terms, as in 
Ted thinks Alice wants Fred to go away. It is at this level that 
theory of mind begins. And so to third order: Alice believes that 
Fred thinks she wants him to go away. Recursion kicks in once we 
get beyond first order, and our social life is replete with such ex­
amples. There seems some reason to believe, though, that we lose 
track at about the fifth or sixth order,14 perhaps because of limited 
working-memory capacity rather than any intrinsic limit on recur­
sion itself. We can perhaps just wrap our minds around proposi­
tions like: Ted suspects that Alice believes that he does indeed sus-
pect that Fred thinks that she wants him (Fred) to go away. That’s 
fifth order, as you can tell by counting the words in bold type. You 
could make it sixth order by adding George imagines that . . . at the 
beginning.
According to Robin Dunbar, it is through theory of mind that 
people may have come to know God, as it were. The notion of a 
God who is kind, who watches over us, who punishes, who admits 
us to Heaven if we are suitably virtuous, depends on the under­
standing that other beings—in this case a supposedly supernatural 
one—can have human-like thoughts and emotions. Indeed Dunbar  

138   chapter 8
argues that several orders of intentionality may be required, since 
religion is a social activity, dependent on shared beliefs. The recur­
sive loops that are necessary run something like this: I suppose 
that you think that I believe there are gods who intend to influence  
our futures because they understand our desires.15 This is fifth-order 
intentionality.16 Dunbar himself must have achieved sixth-order 
intentionality if he supposes all this, and if you suppose that he 
does then you have achieved seventh-order. Call it Seventh Heaven, 
if you like.
If God depends on theory of mind, so too, perhaps, does the con­
cept of self. This returns us to the opening paragraph of this book, 
and Descartes’s famous syllogism “I think, therefore I am.” Since he 
was appealing to his own thought about thinking, this is second- 
order intentionality. Of course we also understand the self to con­
tinue through time, which requires the (recursive) understanding 
that our consciousness also transcends the present.
People and Things
A few individuals appear to lack the ability to read minds, and 
Simon Baron-Cohen has argued that this deficit, which he calls 
mindblindness, underlies the condition known as autism.17 People 
with this condition may be intelligent in other respects, but are pe­
culiarly unresponsive to other people. One remarkable case is a 
woman called Temple Grandin, who has a Ph.D. in agricultural 
science and works as a teacher and researcher at Colorado State 
University. Clearly intelligent, she has written several books, three 
of which describe her own condition and the manner in which 
she has dealt with it.18 Her plight was also vividly described by 
Oliver Sacks in his book An Anthropologist on Mars.19 She has 
had to laboriously teach herself how people act in different circum­
stances, so that she knows how to act appropriately in social situ­
ations. One bonus arising from this strategy is that her habit of 
detailed observations of behavior has provided insights into the 
behavior of animals, as revealed in her most recent book, Animals 
in Translation: Using the Mysteries of Autism to Decode Animal 

mind reading   139
Behavior.20 This book prompted a documentary, broadcast on the 
BBC on 8 June 2006, rather unkindly entitled “The Woman Who 
Thinks Like a Cow.” Curiously, though, she is sensitive to emotion 
in others, and is herself emotionally sensitive. The very specific na­
ture of this disability has led some evolutionary psychologists to 
propose that theory of mind is a module, independent of other 
aspects of the human mind. 
High-functioning autism, as evident in people like Temple Gran­
din, is known as Asperger’s syndrome. People with this condition 
often can pass false-belief tests, such as the Sally-Anne test, but they 
apparently do so only through verbal reasoning and explicit in­
structions about the task. As I noted earlier, normal infants seem to 
instinctively demonstrate an understanding of false belief well be­
fore they can demonstrate it verbally, since they will look to where  
an actor mistakenly believes an object to be hidden. People with 
Asperger’s syndrome do not do this, suggesting that the spontane­
ous understanding of false belief is lacking.21 
At the opposite end of the spectrum to autism, it has been sug­
gested, lies psychosis.22 At least some aspects of psychosis seem to  
reflect a hypermentalism. The more florid symptoms of schizo­
phrenia, for example, include hallucinations, delusions, and para­
noia. It’s as though schizophrenics read too much into the minds of 
others, to the point that they think there are plots to exterminate 
them, or that their minds are controlled by some sinister external 
agency. The Scottish psychiatrist R. D. Laing23 was particularly 
adept at expressing the recursive mentality that can cause social re­
lationships to go wrong, and psychosis to develop. Here are ex­
cerpts from his aptly titled book Knots:
JILL: I’m upset you are upset 
JACK: I’m not upset 
JILL: I’m upset that you’re not upset that I’m upset that you’re upset. 
JACK: I’m upset that you’re upset that I’m not upset that you’re upset 
that I’m upset, when I’m not.
JILL: You put me in the wrong 
JACK: I am not putting you in the wrong 
JILL: You put me in the wrong for thinking you put me in the wrong.

140   chapter 8
JACK: Forgive me 
JILL: No 
JACK: I’ll never forgive you for not forgiving me
The extremes of autism and psychosis may lie on a continuum 
that governs normal as well as abnormal behavior. Some personal­
ity theorists write of the schizotypal personality, with a tendency 
toward paranoia and magical thinking, but not classifiable as psy­
chotic. Toward the other end of the continuum, some individuals 
show autistic tendencies, which may include specific language im­
pairments and obsessive-compulsive behaviors. Think of computer 
geeks. (Perhaps you are even one yourself, although I suppose if you  
are, you mightn’t know it.) The continuum may also be considered 
one of mechanism versus mentalism. We live in a complex world of 
things and people, and nature seems to have provided us with suf­
ficient flexibility to deal with both. As the evolutionary biologist 
William D. Hamilton put it, “There are people people and things 
people.”24
Things people may tend to adopt what I have called the physi­
cal stance, in which people are regarded more as moving lumps of  
meat than as mental beings. Perhaps radical behaviorists, and rugby 
players, tend to see people in this way. Conversely, people people  
may tend to treat things as people. Inanimate objects, such as cars, 
ships, or computers, are often ascribed human-like properties. 
Throughout history, and perhaps human prehistory, people have 
personified inanimate objects, such as the stars and planets, and 
have bestowed human properties on nonhuman animals. Personi­
fied animals dwell especially comfortably in children’s books, as 
we saw in chapter 3. And then there’s God, encountered earlier, 
who appears to be personification without material substance—
the ultimate triumph, perhaps, of theory of mind.
Sex and the Brain
To a degree at least, the autistic-psychotic spectrum seems to un­
derlie differences between men and women. Simon Baron-Cohen 
has described autism as an extreme of male behavior, and men in 
general seem more concerned with things than with people25—and 
indeed may tend to treat women as things rather than as people. 

mind reading   141
Despite the efforts of feminists, young boys seem to prefer toy trac­
tors or spaceships, while young girls go for dolls and their mothers’ 
makeup. The positive symptoms of schizophrenia are more com­
mon in females than in males, although negative symptoms and 
schizophrenia as a whole are somewhat more common in males. 
And women tend to be more religious—as we have seen, this can 
be considered a rather complex manifestation of theory of mind. 
Students of psychology, the science of the mind, are predominantly 
female—at least in the departments of psychology I am familiar 
with—although in the old days of behaviorism there were more 
men about. Men may be more drawn to the sciences of the physical  
world. 
The biological basis of the autistic-psychotic spectrum may de­
pend more on maternal and paternal genes than on the biological 
sex of the offspring. The battle of the sexes begins in the womb, 
through the phenomenon of imprinting. Chromosomes come in 
pairs, one from the mother and one from the father, and imprint­
ing means that one or other can dominate. The parents have differ­
ent interests in the fate of the offspring, and this can be expressed 
in the relative influence of maternal and paternal genes. In mamma­
lian species, the only obligatory contribution of the male to the off­
spring is the sperm, and the father relies primarily on his genes to 
influence the offspring to behave in ways that support his biologi­
cal interest. Paternal genes should therefore favor self-interested 
behavior in the offspring, drawing on the mother’s resources and 
preventing her from using resources on offspring that might have 
been sired by other fathers. The mother, on the other hand, has 
continuing investment in the child both before birth, in terms of 
nutrient from her own body, and after birth, in terms of breast 
milk and care-giving. Maternal genes should therefore operate to 
conserve her resources, favoring sociability and educability26—nice 
kids, who go to school and do what they’re told.
Maternal genes are expressed most strongly in the cortex, repre­
senting theory of mind, language, and social competence, whereas 
paternal genes tend to be expressed more in the limbic system, 
which deals with resource-demanding basic drives, such as aggres­
sion, appetites, and emotion. Autism, then, can be regarded as the 
extreme expression of paternal genes, schizophrenia as the extreme 

142   chapter 8
expression of maternal genes. Many of the characteristics linked to 
the autistic and psychotic spectra are physical, and can be readily 
understood in terms of the struggle for maternal resources. The 
autistic spectrum is associated with overgrowth of the placenta, 
larger brain size, higher levels of growth factors, and the psychotic 
spectrum with placental undergrowth, smaller brain size, and slow 
growth.27
The relative dominance of maternal and paternal genes should 
not be confused with the effects of the sex chromosomes them­
selves. Not all males are aggressive, overgrown hunks who can’t 
read books and don’t eat quiche, and not all females are polite 
blue-stocking vegetarians who devour the novels of Jane Austen. 
Nevertheless there does seem to be a correlation between imprint­
ing and biological sex, with males leaning toward the autistic end 
of the continuum and females toward the schizophrenic end. This 
may arise because the X chromosome, along with chromosomes 2, 
3, 5, 7, 9, 10, 15, 16, and 17, is one of the chromosomes subject 
to differential imprinting,28 although presumably only in females 
since males receive only one copy of the X chromosome through 
the mother. Given the multitude of chromosomes involved, the ef­
fects of imprinting are likely to be diverse, and not exclusively as­
sociated with one or other sex. 
Imprinting may have played a major role in human evolution. 
One suggestion is that evolution of the human brain was driven by 
the progressive influence of maternal genes, leading to expansion 
of the neocortex and the emergence of recursive cognition, includ­
ing language and theory of mind. The persisting influence of pater­
nal genes, though, may have preserved the overall balance between 
people people and things people, while also permitting a degree of 
difference. Simon Baron-Cohen has suggested that the dimension 
can also be understood along an axis of empathizers versus sys­
tematizers.29 People people tend to empathize with others, through 
adopting the intentional stance and the ability to take the perspec­
tive of others. Things people may excel at synthesizing, through  
obsessive attention to detail and compulsive extraction of rules.30 
Although one might suppose that a balance of maternal and 
paternal genes is optimal, it is perhaps the departures from genetic 

mind reading   143
balance that add innovation and creativity to our lives. The pio­
neering British psychiatrist Henry Maudsley noted that insanity 
was often accompanied by creative genius. One example was the 
eighteenth-century English essayist Charles Lamb, who was prone 
to periods of mental illness. Maudsley commented as follows
His [Lamb’s] case, too, may show that the insane temperament is 
compatible with, and indeed not seldom coexists with, considerable  
genius.31
Recent evidence suggests that a particular polymorphism on a gene  
known to be related to the risk of psychosis is also related to cre­
ativity in people with high intellectual achievement.32 
The tendency to schizophrenia or bipolar disorder may under­
lie creativity in the arts, as exemplified by musicians such as Béla 
Bartók, Ludwig van Beethoven, Maurice Ravel, or Peter Warlock, 
artists such as Amedeo Clemente Modigliani, Maurice Utrillo, or 
Vincent van Gogh, and writers such as Jack Kerouac, D. H. Law­
rence, Eugene O’Neill, or Marcel Proust. The esteemed mathemati­
cian John Forbes Nash, subject of the Hollywood movie A Beauti-
ful Mind, is another example. The late David Horrobin went so far 
as to argue that people with schizophrenia were regarded as the 
visionaries who shaped human destiny itself, and it was only with 
the Industrial Revolution, and a change in diet, that schizophrenics 
were seen as mentally ill.33
The tendency to autism, especially high-functioning autism (As­
perger’s syndrome) may lead to genius of a different kind. This 
includes savants, individuals with extraordinary ability in some 
narrow domain, such as calculation, music, or even language, but 
in other respects subnormal. In chapter 5 we encountered the sa­
vant and calculation wizard Kim Peek. Savantism may arise from 
the narrow focusing on one activity at the expense of others. The 
tendency to autism, though, may also underlie high-level achieve­
ment in mathematics, physical sciences, or engineering, coupled 
with ob­sessional thinking. Isaac Newton may be a prototypi­
cal example. Another is the Nobel Prize–winning physicist Paul 
Dirac, regarded by some as being in the same league as Albert 
Einstein, but also described by his fellow physicist Niels Bohr as 

144   CHAPTER 8
“the strangest man.”34 Things people may have their uses after 
all, since they help us understand an increasingly complex physi­
cal world. And we should not deny them the capacity to think  
recursively. 
Recursion, then, is not the exclusive preserve of social interac­
tion. Our mechanical world is as recursively complex as is the so­
cial world. There are wheels within wheels, engines within engines, 
computers within computers. Cities are containers built of contain­
ers within containers, going right down, I suppose, to handbags 
and pockets within our clothing. Recursive routines are a com­
monplace in computer programming, and it is mathematics that 
gives us the clearest idea of what recursion is all about. But recur­
sion may well have stemmed from runaway theory of mind, and  
been later released into the mechanical world. I explore this further  
in chapter 12.
Do Animals Have Theory of Mind?
As Darwin recognized in the extract quoted earlier, there is little 
doubt that other species can read emotion in others—life often 
depends on it. In all animals in which reproduction depends on 
feeding, cleaning, warming, and protecting the young, parents are 
sensitive to the emotional state of the infant, and act to relieve dis­
tress or satisfy hunger or thirst. Many animals also respond with 
sympathy to perceived distress in others. In one study, for example, 
mice perceiving pain in other mice intensified their own reaction 
to pain,35 and in another study monkeys refused to pull a chain to 
receive food if doing so caused a shock to be delivered to another 
monkey.36 Frans de Waal documents these and other examples, and 
notes that chimpanzees, but not monkeys, often give consolation 
to others in distress. His ready camera records a juvenile chimpan­
zee putting a consoling arm around a screaming adult who has just 
been defeated in a fight.37
More problematic, though, are the more cognitive aspects of 
theory of mind, such as knowing what another individual sees or 
believes. It is natural to look first in our closest primate relative, 
the chimpanzee. The question was first put by David Premack and 

MIND READING   145
Guy Woodruff in 1978, in a classic paper entitled “Does the Chim­
panzee Have a Theory of Mind?” One of their techniques was 
to show videos of a human grappling with some problem, and 
then offer the chimpanzee Sarah a choice of photographs, one of 
which depicted a solution to the problem. One such test showed a 
woman trying to escape from a locked cage, and one of the photos 
showed a key, while others showed objects irrelevant to the task. 
Sarah performed quite well at choosing the appropriate photo, al­
though as Premack and Woodruff recognized, this need not show 
that she appreciated what was going on in the mind of the person 
depicted. For example, the key might have been selected through 
simple association with the cage.
One researcher who has taken up Premack and Woodruff’s chal­
lenge is Daniel Povinelli, who has tried further tests to determine 
whether a chimpanzee can understand what is going on in the mind 
of a person.38 The results have been largely negative. Chimpanzees 
readily approach humans to beg for food, and this provided an 
opportunity to check whether in so doing they are influenced by 
whether the person can see or not. But when offered the choice of 
two individuals to beg from, one with a blindfold over her eyes, 
the animals did not systematically choose the one who could see. 
The same was true when one of the people had a bucket over her 
head, or covered her eyes with her hands. Only when one of the 
people was actually facing the other way did the chimpanzees eas­
ily choose the one facing toward themselves. Young children, on 
the other hand, quickly recognize that they should approach the 
person who can see them, and understand that this depends on 
the eyes. The failure of the chimpanzee to appreciate this does not 
arise from failure to observe the eyes, since they readily follow the 
gaze of a person confronting them. Chimpanzees may eventually 
choose the person who can see them, but the behavior is more sim­
ply explained by associative learning, and not on the understand­
ing that eyes are for seeing.
Another test depends on the chimpanzee’s apparent understand­
ing of pointing. If a person sits in front of a chimpanzee and points 
to one of two boxes to left or right, the chimpanzee understands 
readily enough that if it wants food, it should go to the box that 
the person is pointing to. But the choice breaks down if the person 

146   chapter 8
points from some distance away, and is systematically reversed if 
the person sits closer to the box that does not contain the food and 
points to the other one. It seems that chimpanzees respond on the 
basis of how close the pointing hand is to the box containing the 
food, and not on the basis of where the hand is actually pointing.
Yet chimpanzees do follow eye gaze,39 just as humans do, and 
this may suggest that they have at least some understanding that 
others can see. Povinelli argues, though, that behaviors like fol­
lowing eye gaze have the same instinctive basis in humans as in 
other primates, but that we “reinterpret” these behaviors as being 
more sophisticated than they really are.40 For example, we may 
spontaneously follow the gaze of someone who seems to be gazing 
at something in the sky without going through an intellectual (and 
presumably conscious) exercise along the lines of That fellow must 
be able to see something up there that’s interesting. Gaze follow­
ing may simply be an adaptive response that alerts other animals 
to danger or reward, but we humans have intellectualized it, often 
after the fact. Remember too that even infants gaze in anticipation 
of where an actor will falsely believe an object to be hidden, well 
before they can intellectualize the reason for their own behavior.
Other work suggests, though, that the work of Povinelli and his 
colleagues underestimates the social intelligence of the chimpan­
zee. Brian Hare and colleagues have shown that a chimpanzee will 
approach food when a more dominant chimpanzee cannot see the 
food, but will be reluctant to do so when they can see that the food 
is visible to the dominant chimpanzee.41 Chimpanzees also seem 
able to pass the equivalent of the Sally-Anne test, referred to ear­
lier. Subordinate chimpanzees will retrieve hidden food if a domi­
nant chimpanzee was not watching while the food was hidden, 
or if the food was moved to another location while the dominant 
chimp wasn’t watching. That is, the subordinate chimps appear to 
have knowledge of what the dominant knows. The subordinates 
will also retrieve food if a dominant chimp watched it being hid­
den, but is then replaced by another dominant chimp who hadn’t 
watched, suggesting the subordinates can keep track of who knows 
what. The subordinates failed on another test, though, in which a 
dominant chimp watched one piece of food being hidden but did 
not watch another piece being hidden; they failed to consistently 

mind reading   147
choose the food that the dominant chimp hadn’t watched.42 Even 
so, the chimps in this study seemed to have at least some knowl­
edge of what another chimp knew. 
Chimps have also been observed to hide things from each other. 
In one study, chimps contested access to food with a human exper­
imenter, and chose to approach the food via a route hidden from  
the experimenter’s view.43 Sometimes this route was a circuitous 
one. Brian Hare has also shown that dogs, unlike Povinelli’s chimps, 
can choose food sources according to where either a person or 
another dog is looking or pointing.44 It is not clear why Hare’s  
chimpanzees and dogs seem more blessed with theory of mind 
than were the chimpanzees studied by Povinelli.45 
A difficulty in these studies is that they need not imply an inten­
tional stance.46 The animals might simply be responding on the 
basis of learned cues, without any sense that the action is based on 
an understanding of what is going on in another animal’s mind—
much as people with Asperger’s syndrome can solve theory-of-mind  
problems without true understanding. If you are a young chim­
panzee, the mere sight of a dominant male in the vicinity may act 
as a simple, learned signal not to behave in certain ways, just as 
a human child may wait until his mother’s back is turned before 
punching his younger sister. But a measure of intentionality may be  
introduced when she later cries even if not hit, so that her older 
brother will be punished. In order to infer genuine theory of mind, 
then, we need some evidence that an act has been improvised, rather  
than based on trial-and-error learning. Richard Byrne, in his book 
The Thinking Ape, gives an example that may qualify:
A young baboon, coming across an adult baboon who had just ex­
humed a root to eat, lets out a scream. This scream alerted the young 
baboon’s mother, who outranked the adult in status. The mother 
rushed over, took in the scene of the adult, the root and the seem­
ingly distressed young animal and chased the adult off. Meanwhile the 
young baboon ate the root.
Behaviors like this appear to be intentionally deceptive, and are 
referred to as tactical deception. Deception itself is widespread in 
nature, whether in the camouflage of a butterfly wing or the un­
canny ability of the Australian lyre bird to imitate the sounds of 

148   chapter 8
other species—as mentioned in chapter 3, this includes the sound 
of a beer can being opened. Tactical deception, however, is that 
in which the deception is based on an appreciation of what the 
deceived animal is actually thinking, or what it can see—that is, 
it implies an intentional stance. The most obvious form of tactical 
deception in humans is telling lies, which we do in the hope that 
the recipient will believe what we say, but in nonverbal animals 
we must seek evidence from their actions. Andrew Whiten and 
Richard Byrne asked primate researchers for anecdotes from their 
field studies involving deceptive behavior, and carefully screened 
out cases in which the animals might have learned the behavior 
through trial and error.47 They concluded that only the four spe­
cies of ape occasionally showed evidence of having deceived on the 
basis of an understanding of what the deceived animal could see 
or know. Even so, there were relatively few instances—out of 253 
observations, only 21 met Whiten and Byrne’s criteria—12 from 
common chimpanzees and three each from bonobos, gorillas, and 
orangutans. These numbers are perhaps too small to convincingly 
demonstrate that great apes can truly “read the minds” of others.
It is sometimes suggested that there is a sort of intermediate 
between the physical stance and the intentional stance—a biologi­
cal stance, if you will. Thus young children and apes may be able 
to attribute goal-directedness and self-generated motion to oth­
ers, without being able to attribute full-blown intentional states, 
such as believing, desiring, seeing, or remembering.48 This does 
not seem to involve recursion; attributing self-generated motion 
to another creature carries no implication that the other creature 
can also attribute self-generated motion. There seems no reason at 
present to suppose that the great apes can advance much beyond 
this level of attribution.49
Self-Awareness in Other Species?
What, then, of the ability to know one’s own mind? Could a chim­
panzee emulate Descartes and infer its own existence? One pro­
posed way to answer this question is the so-called mirror test, in 

mind reading   149
which a mark is applied to the animal’s face, and the animal is 
then allowed to see itself in a mirror. The question is whether the 
animal will understand that the mark is on its own face, rather 
than on that of some stranger in the mirror. It is common practice 
to anesthetize the animal before applying the mark, so the animal 
is unaware of the mark being placed. Chimpanzees with prior ex­
perience of mirrors reach up and touch the marks on their faces, 
while those without experience with mirrors react as though there 
is another chimpanzee in the mirror, as do rhesus monkeys even 
after many years of experience.50 It appears that the great apes 
pass the test, although not consistently, whereas lesser apes and 
monkeys do not, and there is weak evidence that an elephant and 
a dolphin may also pass. Children typically pass the test by two 
years of age.51 
But even this test need not imply more than a physical stance; 
that is, the animal may recognize itself as a physical object, with­
out any necessary understanding that that object has desires, be­
liefs, emotions, and the like. Even we humans may use mirrors to 
reflect ourselves as objects, rather than as sentient beings—a face 
to be shaved, or rendered more beautiful. The reflection in the mir­
ror, after all, is not someone with whom one can have a meaning­
ful conversation. 
Where Are We?
The question of whether chimps and other species have theory of 
mind remains highly contested. Some authors continue to reject all 
claims of theory of mind in nonhuman species, and indeed it may 
always be possible to explain apparently human-like intentional be­
havior in terms of behavioristic principles. Derek C. Penn, Keith J.  
Holyoak, and Daniel C. Povinelli, in an article headed “Darwin’s 
Mistake,” conclude as follows:
Our most important claim . . . is simply that whatever “good trick” . . .  
was responsible for the advent of human beings’ ability to reinterpret 
the world in a symbolic-relational fashion, it evolved in only one lin­
eage—ours. Nonhuman animals didn’t (and still don’t) get it.52

150   chapter 8
In this view, activities in nonhuman animals that seem to imply 
human-like cognition, such as theory of mind, are reinterpreted in 
symbolic terms. They dub their theory the “relational reinterpreta­
tion” theory.53
There remains the persisting question, though, of what explains 
the discontinuity. Despite referring to “Darwin’s mistake,” Penn 
and colleagues continue to use the term “evolved” in the above ex­
tract, but reference to a “good trick” gets us little further than 
reference to God or some miraculous mutation. Moreover, the  
appeal to “reinterpretation” is unparsimonious, implying an un­
necessary step between what we do and how we interpret it. If a 
chimpanzee hides from prying human eyes, there seems no good 
reason to suppose that its behavior is any different in principle  
from that of the naughty child who hides from an angry parent. It 
smacks of arrogance to dismiss human-like behavior in animals on 
the grounds that humans have somehow reinterpreted such behav­
ior in our own species to take it beyond the ken of the merely 
animal. 
My own tentative view is that chimpanzees may indeed have 
some capacity to discern what other individuals can feel, see, and 
perhaps know. This is first-order recursion, at best. What they may  
lack, though, is the extension to higher-order recursion—my knowl­
edge that another individual knows what I can see, know, or feel, 
or even that the other knows that I know what she’s thinking. 
Whether or not this can explain the full repertoire of distinctively 
human activities, it does suggest that the difference is more one of 
degree than one of kind—that small step that proved such a giant 
leap for humankind.
Runaway theory of mind might be attributed to the highly social 
lives that we humans live, whether in the nuclear family, the office,  
the hunting party, or the rugby scrum. In such settings we must con­
stantly monitor our actions in accord with how others think, be­
lieve, and feel. The conditions that led to the evolution of complex 
social behavior are discussed further in chapter 11.
Let’s now return to language, since it too, in its predatory way, 
depends on theory of mind, and provides further insight into its 
recursive structure.

9
Language and Mind
Political language—and with variations this is true of all political  
parties, from Conservatives to Anarchists—is designed to make  
lies sound truthful and murder respectable, and to give an  
appearance of solidity to pure wind. 
—George Orwell, Politics and the English Language (1946)
In his novel Nineteen Eighty-four, Orwell painted a grim picture 
of a future in which the ultimate technology for thought control 
was the language Newspeak, which could render impossible all 
modes of thought other than those required by Ingsoc (English 
Socialism). We have struggled past 1984, but political life, at least, 
is still replete with euphemisms designed to make us think dif-
ferently. Thus collateral damage is a way of referring to the kill-
ing of innocent people during war, underprivileged means poor, 
special means handicapped, liquidate means murder. An extreme 
movement known as General Semantics was established in 1933 
by Count Alfred Kozybski, an engineer, and popularized in best-
sellers such as Stuart Chase’s Tyranny of Words, and Samuel Ichiye 
Hayakawa’s Language in Thought and Action. Hayakawa was 
later president of San Francisco State College, and gained notori-
ety for stamping out student protest. According to General Seman-
tics, human folly is created by semantic damage brought about by 
the structure of language.
The relation between language and thought is one of the most 
contentious issues in the history of philosophy. As we saw in chap-
ter 2, Chomsky’s concept of I-language—the common language 
underlying E-languages—is essentially the language of thought. 
This is encapsulated also in the so-called language of thought  

152   chapter 9
hypothesis proposed by the philosopher Jerry Fodor, who argued 
that virtually all of the concepts underlying words are innate.1 
Steven Pinker refers to this as the theory that “we are born with 
some 50,000 concepts,” based on the number of words in the typi-
cal English speaker’s vocabulary.2 Of course the actual words we 
use will depend on the linguistic environment a person is exposed 
to, but it is as though we have been already supplied with all the 
meanings we shall ever want, and all we need do is discover the 
verbal labels. It is of course difficult to believe that a person alive 
during the Renaissance could have been supplied with the mean-
ing of the word helicopter, although one might perhaps make an 
exception of Leonardo da Vinci, who indeed developed the idea of 
such a contraption.
The idea of a strong connection between language and thought 
implies that nonhuman animals are incapable of thinking as we 
humans do, an idea defended by the psychologist Clive Wynn in 
his 2004 book Do Animals Think? If nothing else, the idea of 
dumb animals—dumb in both senses of the word—is a source of 
comfort, because it helps justify our appalling treatment of our 
fellow creatures, as I noted in the preface to this book. Not only 
do we treat them badly, but we also use them for insults, as when 
we characterize people as brutish, beastly, swinish, mousey, mulish, 
catty, hawkish, foxy, bullish, and lazy cows. 
Most such expressions are unfair to the animal in question. Con-
sider, for example, the phrase pissed as a newt—as far as I know, 
newts are not known for inebriation.3 There are of course coun-
terinfluences, such as the animal rights movement, which in its ex-
treme form seeks to reverse the exploitation, threatening to harm 
or even kill people who exploit animals, with the aim, I suppose, of 
redressing the balance. Less extreme is animal welfare legislation 
that seeks to minimize harm to animals. Ironically, perhaps, it was 
in Nazi Germany that hunting foxes with hounds was first banned, 
on the orders of Hermann Göring in 1934. In Britain, the Hunting 
Act of 2004 states that “a person commits an offence if he hunts a 
wild mammal with a dog, unless his hunting is exempt.”4
A modicum of thought, though, should convince us that other 
animals have at least a modicum of thought. The companionship 

Language and Mind   153
of cats and dogs depends on behaviors that are not merely reflex. 
The behaviorists even supposed that the laws governing human ac-
tion could be understood through experiments on rats or pigeons. 
Of course the behaviorists preferred not to speak of consciousness  
or mental events, so that even human activity was described in 
terms of behaviors, not thoughts, but the idea of a continuity be-
tween animals and humans was paramount. As John B. Watson, 
the founder of behaviorism, put it, “Behaviorism . . . recognizes no 
dividing line between men and brutes.”5 In chapter 3 I described 
how starlings were able to solve problems in parsing sequences 
that their experimenters believed to require recursive processing. 
By adopting a simpler but still clever strategy, the starlings may 
be said to have out-thought their human keepers. In chapter 3, 
too, I noted Wolfgang Köhler’s classic experiments on insight in  
chimpanzees.
Perhaps the most eloquent advocate for the recognition of animal  
thought and consciousness was the late Donald R. Griffin, whose 
1976 book The Question of Animal Awareness claimed that an-
imal communication offered “a possible window on the animal 
mind.” Griffin continued to write on this topic, and his most recent 
book, Animal Minds: Beyond Cognition to Consciousness (2001) 
opens with the following anecdote:
A hungry chimpanzee walking through his native rain forest comes 
upon a large Panda oleosa nut lying on the ground under one of the 
widely scattered Panda trees. He knows that these nuts are much too 
hard to open with his hands or teeth and although he can use pieces of 
wood or relatively soft rocks to batter open the more abundant Coula 
edulis nuts, these tough Panda nuts can only be cracked by pounding 
them with a very hard piece of rock. Very few stones are available in 
the rain forest, but he walks 80 meters straight to another tree where 
several days ago he had cracked open a Panda nut with a large chunk 
of granite. He carries this rock back to the nut he has just found, places 
it in a crotch between two buttress roots, and cracks it open with a few 
well-aimed blows.6
Despite such anecdotes, it is difficult to disagree with Clive 
Wynn’s assertion that animals do not think as we humans do. Of 

154   chapter 9
course they can do lots of things that we humans cannot do; ex-
amples include echolocation in bats and global navigation in mi-
grating birds, and our clumsy machines that fly pale beside the 
effortless grace of a bird on the wing. Birds that cache food per-
form outstanding feats of memory, remembering thousands of dif-
ferent locations. A recent study shows a remarkable performance 
of chimpanzees in remembering the locations of briefly displayed 
numerals; one chimp outperformed a group of university students 
on this task.7 So what is missing? 
The evidence reviewed so far in this book indicates that nonhu-
man animals, even chimpanzees, are essentially incapable of theory 
of mind, mental time travel, or language—or are at best capable of 
these capacities only sporadically, and only in rudimentary fash-
ion. I argued in chapter 7 that grammatical language depends on 
mental time travel, and the adaptive advantage of being able to 
share episodes. The final ingredient essential to the evolution of 
language may have been that other recursive function discussed in 
chapter 8—theory of mind. 
Language and Theory of Mind
There is a well-known joke about a man who meets a business 
rival at a train station and asks where he is going. The business 
rival replies he is going to Minsk. The first man then says, “You’re 
telling me you’re going to Minsk because you want me to think 
you’re going to Pinsk. But I happen to know that you are going to 
Minsk, so why are you lying to me?”
Commenting on this conversation, Steven Pinker writes:
If a speaker and a listener were ever to work through the tacit propo-
sitions that underlie their conversation, the depth of the recursively 
embedded mental states would be dizzying.8
This is an exaggerated example, but in normal conversation we 
hardly ever spell out exactly what we mean. Instead, we depend on 
shared assumptions about what is going on in each other’s minds. 
You might meet a colleague at work one morning and say, Hey, that 

Language and Mind   155
was a great game. You know that she watched the rugby match last 
night, and would have appreciated its quality. You know too that 
she knows that you are referring to that game, and not to some 
other event, and you know that she knows that you know this. If 
you are speaking to a less familiar colleague, though, you might 
offer more information: Did you watch the rugby last night? Great 
game, wasn’t it? Or, to a bemused visitor from the United States: 
Rugby, you know, is our national passion. There was a game shown 
on TV last night, and if you happened to watch it you would have 
seen rugby at its best. We therefore calibrate our conversational 
remarks according to theory of mind—our often implicit assump-
tions about what the recipient understands and knows.
Sometimes, of course, language is directed at a broader audi-
ence, and even as I write this paragraph I have in mind the minds 
of the audience I hope to reach. That audience, of course, includes 
you. I assume for a start that you understand English, and that 
your understanding of the world is much the same as mine, so that 
the various illustrations I use will make sense. I nevertheless try to 
spell out the arguments more than I might do if communicating 
with a close colleague in the same field—such colleagues won’t 
read the book anyway, since they know me and the stuff I write all 
too well. The mental work underlying our utterances, whether in 
casual conversation or in delivering a formal lecture, is recognized 
by the discipline known as cognitive linguistics. One of its fore-
most proponents, Gilles Fauconnier, writes that “when we engage 
in any language activity, we draw unconsciously on vast cognitive 
and cultural resources, call up models and frames, set up multiple 
connections, coordinate large arrays of information, and engage in 
creative mappings, transfers, and elaborations.”9
The essential role of theory of mind in language can be credited 
to the philosopher Paul Grice, who held that true language re-
quires that the speaker has the intention of changing belief in the 
mind of the listener by means of the recognition of that intention. 
(How’s that for a recursive sentence?). Grice was much concerned 
with the complex reasoning that goes into decoding what a given 
sentence might mean. He gives an example of what might underlie 
an utterance, P, in relation to a certain unstated thought, Q: 

156   chapter 9
He said that P; he could not have done this unless he thought that Q; 
he knows (and knows that I know that he knows) that I will realize 
that it is necessary to suppose that Q; he has done nothing to stop me 
thinking that Q; so he intends me to think, or is at least willing for me 
to think, that Q.10
Unraveling this recursive tangle, though, would seem extremely 
complex, and at odds with the apparent ease with which people 
converse. The various thought processes and intentions underly-
ing such statements are known as implicatures, and the manner in 
which speakers and listeners determine implicatures is one of the 
goals of the branch of linguistics known as pragmatics. Dan Sperber 
and Deirdre Wilson have argued that the implicatures depend on a 
specialized theory-of-mind module, in the sense proposed by Jerry 
Fodor, and briefly discussed in chapter 1. Modules are assumed to 
be innate, and to operate automatically, so one might suppose that 
they carry out operations of a complexity similar to those that, 
say, allow us to maintain balance while walking. Even so, simply 
declaring a function to depend on an innate module doesn’t tell us 
how it actually works.
Sperber and Wilson suggest that there are submodules that help 
narrow down the alternative meanings, and so reduce the com-
putational demand. For instance, we have a built-in sensitivity to 
where others are looking, and this can establish a common focus 
of attention. A statement such as That’s really weird can then be 
quickly understood to refer to any object at that focus. More gen-
erally, Sperber and Wilson suggest that we continually maximize 
the relevance of available inputs, whether from the outside world 
or from memory, which can include knowledge of the memories 
and cultural habits of the person we are conversing with. This im-
mediately narrows the possible interpretations of utterances, and 
may allow a conversation to proceed with minimal unraveling of 
the possible implicatures. 
Sperber and Wilson provide an illustration of how this might 
work:
Suppose that Peter and Mary are walking in the park. They are en-
gaged in conversation; there are trees, flowers, birds, and people all 

Language and Mind   157
around them. Still, when Peter sees their acquaintance John in a group 
of people coming towards them, he correctly predicts that Mary will 
notice John, remember that he moved to Australia three months ear-
lier, infer that there must be some reason he is back in London, and 
conclude that it would be appropriate to ask him about this. Peter 
predicts Mary’s train of thought so easily, and in such a familiar way, 
that it is not always appreciated how remarkable this is from a cogni-
tive point of view.11
So-called relevance theory, as developed more fully elsewhere 
by Sperber and Wilson,12 suggests that our minds are focused, mo-
ment to moment, in such a way as to tune our thought processes 
to what is most relevant, and so reduce the linguistic demand. In 
conversation, we may be impervious to all but the topic under dis-
cussion, and oblivious to other events in the environment. This im-
mediately disambiguates what might otherwise be multiply ambig-
uous statements. Any unexpected happening would likewise shift 
the shared mental processing, so participants in the conversation 
could immediately reach a mutual understanding of what to talk 
about. Language, then, is a meeting of minds, and conversation 
often does little more than float on the surface of shared streams 
of thought
At least in conversation, then, language requires what Dennett 
called the intentional stance, in which we treat people as men-
tal rather than physical beings. We make implicit assumptions 
about the extent to which a listener is tuned into the same stream 
of thought, and adjust our language accordingly. Sometimes, of 
course, we err, as in lectures when students manifestly have no idea 
what I’m talking about. One might swear at a dog, or a car that 
won’t start, and even tell stories to them. A more extreme case is 
illustrated by the following lyric from the 1951 Lerner and Loewe 
musical Paint Your Wagon:
I talk to the trees
But they won’t listen to me
I talk to the stars
But they never hear me
The breeze hasn’t time

158   chapter 9
To stop and hear what I say
I talk to them all in vain.
In varying degrees, natural language is an exercise in minimal-
ism,13 providing just enough information to direct mutual trains of 
thought. This is reflected in two of Grice’s famous Maxims:14
•  Make your contribution as informative as is required for the  
current purposes of the exchange.
•  Do not make your contribution more informative than is required.
Minimalism is exploited in the plays of the Irish author Samuel 
Beckett, and conveyed in his poem What is the word? which ends 
thus:
glimpse -
seem to glimpse -
need to seem to glimpse -
afaint afar away over there what -
folly for to need to seem to glimpse afaint afar away over there 
what -
what -
what is the word -
what is the word
We saw in the previous chapter that people with autism suffer 
deficits in theory of mind. If theory of mind is critical to normal 
language, we should expect them also to have difficulties with lan-
guage. And they do.15 Even Temple Grandin, the high-functioning 
autistic woman we encountered in the previous chapter, struggles 
with language, despite the fact that she has written books and 
teaches in a university. She didn’t begin to speak until the age of 
three and a half, and then used words primarily to refer to things 
rather than people. In the words of W. D. Hamilton, she is a proto-
typical things person rather than a person person. She was teased 
at school for the mechanical way she talked, and was incapable of 
gossip or chitchat. Perhaps it’s not unfair to say she learned lan-
guage in much the same way as an animal might learn to perform 
tricks, and not as a way to share information. 

Language and Mind   159
Irony and Metaphor
As philosophers claim that no true philosophy is possible without 
doubt, by the same token, one may claim that no authentic human 
life is possible without irony.
—Søren Kierkegaard, The Concept of Irony (1841)
Irony provides an excellent example of the role of theory of mind.16 
It refers to those occasions on which we say the precise opposite of  
what we mean, with the understanding that the listener will un-
derstand what we are really getting at. Imagine you get stuck in a 
traffic jam on the way home. “Terrific,” you say to your compan-
ion, “that means we won’t have to sit through the game on TV 
tonight.” If you are a sports fan, this is irony. It is used when there 
is a discrepancy between what we want or expect, and reality, and 
occurs widely in such everyday expressions as clear as mud, or Oh 
great! when you learn that they’ll need your car for yet another 
day before it’s fixed. Election time in my country seems to bring 
out an epidemic of the expression Yeah, right.17
Irony is also a well-known literary device. At the beginning of 
Pride and Prejudice Jane Austen was being ironic when she wrote 
“It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in pos-
session of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife.” She really 
means the opposite—it’s women or their mothers who desperately 
seek a rich single man for marriage. Jonathan Swift was being 
ironic when he put forward A Modest Proposal to solve the prob-
lems of starvation and overpopulation in Ireland by eating babies. 
In The Ransom of Red Chief, the short-story writer O. Henry 
refers to a city: “As flat as a flannel-cake, and called Summit, of 
course.” A crude form of irony is sarcasm, signaled by a sneering 
tone of voice. Dostoyevsky called it “the last refuge of modest and 
chaste-souled people when the privacy of their soul is coarsely and 
intrusively invaded.”18
Irony depends on theory of mind, the secure knowledge that the 
listener understands one’s true intent. It is perhaps most commonly 
used among friends, who share common attitudes and threads of 

160   chapter 9
thought; indeed it has been estimated that irony is used in some  
8 percent of conversational exchanges between friends.19 Irony 
can be dangerous if one moves outside one’s circle of friends and 
acquaintances—as a New Zealander I occasionally find myself 
misunderstood, roughly as a function of cultural distance. I have 
no doubt that people in Italy or Japan have their own acute sense 
of irony, but I have the sense that I may have left in those countries 
a trail of perceived outrageousness.
Irony seems to pose special difficulties for people with autism. 
Szilvia Papp tells of an otherwise bright 16-year-old boy diagnosed 
with autistic spectrum disorder who undertook five GCSE exams 
in Britain, and became extremely upset when his father jokingly 
said, “If you don’t pass you’ll have to do them again.”20 Such dif-
ficulties extend to other kinds of nonliteral statements, such as the  
use of metaphor. Papp observes that if told it is raining cats and 
dogs, the autistic boy will look to the sky to see where these un-
likely animals are coming from. Francesca Happé notes that a dis-
cussion with a bright autistic child can reveal just how much we 
use metaphor in everyday speech.21 For example, asking the child 
to “give you a hand” meets with the serious reply that she needs 
both hands and cannot cut one off. Asking her to “stick her coat 
down over there” is met with a request for glue. Or telling an au-
tistic boy that his sister is “crying her eyes out” leads to anxious 
peering at the floor to find out where her eyes have gone. Because 
of the ubiquity of metaphor in everyday language, autistic indi-
viduals are unable to follow soap operas, and prefer learning lists 
of train times to reading fiction.
Theory of mind also allows normal individuals to use language 
in a loose way that tends not to be understood by those with au-
tism. Most of us, if asked the question “Would you mind telling 
me the time?” would probably answer with the time, but an au-
tistic individual would be more inclined to give a literal answer, 
which might be something like “No, I don’t mind.” Or if you ask 
someone whether she can reach a certain book, you might expect 
her to reach for the book and hand it to you, but an autistic per-
son might simply respond yes or no. This reminds me that I once 
made the mistake of asking a philosopher, “Is it raining or snowing 

Language and Mind   161
outside?”—wanting to know whether I should grab an umbrella 
or a warm coat. He said, “Yes.” Theory of mind allows us to use 
language flexibly and loosely precisely because we share unspo-
ken thoughts, which serve to clarify or amplify the actual spoken  
message.22
The language deficits in autism apply primarily to pragmatics— 
the adaptation of language to social or real-world contexts. In other 
respects, autistic language may be relatively normal, especially in 
individuals with the high-functioning form of autism known as 
Asperger’s syndrome. The books that Temple Grandin has writ-
ten are grammatically correct and reveal a vocabulary that is if 
anything superior to normal. Her deficits in the use of language 
are primarily social, although she has learned to compensate by 
means of dogged attention to how people behave. There may even 
be respects in which language in people with Asperger’s syndrome 
is superior to normal—in the use of technical language, perhaps. 
One study shows high-functioning autistic boys to be superior to 
normal in the naming of pictures of objects.23 But it is the so-
cial function of language, its role in storytelling, gossip, and group 
bonding that was probably critical to the evolution of language 
in the first place. Individuals with autism appear to use language 
primarily to acquire information rather than to share it.
The understanding that true language involves theory of mind, 
and the sharing of information, now allows us to take a closer look 
at gestural communication in chimpanzees, and see what extra is 
needed to turn this into language.
Gestural Origins
I have argued in chapter 4 that the origins of language lie in manual 
gestures, and the most language-like behavior in nonhuman species 
is gestural. But it is still not language. Most authors suggest that 
the deficit is specific to language, a lack of recursive grammar or 
of what has been rather clumsily called the faculty of language in 
the narrow sense (FLN).24 In chapter 7 I suggested that this might 
in turn derive from the inability of nonhuman species, including  

162   chapter 9
apes, to travel mentally in time, and generate sequences of past or 
imagined future events. Here I consider the further possibility that 
apes may also be incapable of the recursive theory of mind that un-
derlies human conversational language. To examine this, we need 
to look more closely at how apes communicate using gestures.
According to Michael Tomasello, there are two kinds of ape ges-
ture.25 One is designed to get another individual to do something. 
These gestures are small rituals, such as lightly hitting another 
animal to initiate play, or touching another beneath the mouth to 
request food, or touching the back of another to initiate piggyback 
riding. The other kind of gesture is designed to attract attention. 
A chimp may point to an item of food that’s just out of reach. By 
attracting another individual’s attention to it, the chimp may hope 
that the individual will pick up the food and hand it across. Other 
attention-getting actions include slapping the ground, throwing 
things, or poking another chimp. 
These behaviors suggest that chimps are at least somewhat sen-
sitive to what’s going on in the minds of others, or to what others 
may do. A chimp may point to an object out of reach to get a per-
son to fetch it for her, but will only do this if she can see that the 
human is paying attention, which does suggest some awareness of 
the human’s attentional state. Tomasello asserts that chimpanzees 
will only point for humans, and the failure to observe pointing 
among chimps in the wild has led to the belief that chimpanzees 
don’t point at all. He suggests, though, that they don’t see the point 
of pointing to each other since they know it won’t work. They have 
learned that humans are cooperative, at least in research settings, 
and that pointing brings its rewards.26 Other kinds of gestures be-
tween chimps may work, especially if both have something to gain, 
as in mutual play. In making gestures, then, chimpanzees do seem 
to be aware of the attentional states of others, whether human 
or ape, and also aware of the intentions of others. And their ges-
tures are used flexibly and intentionally, rather than as responses 
induced by events. These qualities are prerequisites for language. 
Tomasello even refers to them as “the original font from which the 
richness and complexities of human communication and language 
have flowed.”27

Language and Mind   163
But they are not sufficient. Michael Tomasello suggests that the 
missing ingredient is that of sharing. Chimpanzee gestures are es-
sentially imperative, designed to bring reward or advantage to the 
gesturer. That is, the chimp is requesting something rather than 
making a statement. Studies of the use of signs by chimpanzees28 
and bonobos29 in their interactions with humans have shown that 
96–98 percent of their signs are imperative, with the remaining 
2–4 percent serving no apparent function—except perhaps one of 
greeting, or scratching an itch. In marked contrast, human language  
includes declarative statements as well as imperative ones. We talk 
in order to share information, rather than merely request some-
thing for ourselves.30
The declarative function may be evident even in one-year-old 
hu­man infants, who sometimes point to objects that an adult is 
already looking at, indicating the understanding that attention to 
the object is shared. Tomasello gives a number of other examples 
where the intention is to share rather than to receive gratification. 
A 13-month-old child watches as her father arranges the Christmas 
tree. Her grandfather comes into the room, and the child points to 
the tree for him, as if to say, “Look at the tree, isn’t it great?”31 At 
13.5 months, while her mother is looking for a missing refrigerator 
magnet, a child points to a basket of fruit, under which the magnet 
is hidden. Such gestures form the basis of language in that they are 
designed to share information. They also demonstrate that, in de-
velopment as in evolution, language originates in manual gestures.
This morning I am sitting on a bus. A woman in the seat in front 
of me is holding a wriggling 18-month-old boy. She tells me that 
this is his first bus ride, and he is excited. He catches my eye and 
begins to point to things, including cars and houses, the bus driver, 
the cord to signal that people want to get off at the next stop. As he 
points he looks at me. He does not want these things; he wants to 
share his delight in them with me. I don’t think chimpanzees point 
in this way. I think that children only point like this when there’s 
someone to share the information with.32
The toddler has not yet developed full theory of mind, which de-
velops progressively until the age of about four. Pointing to share 
information nevertheless seems to be an early stage in the emergence  

164   chapter 9
of both language and theory of mind.33 It is remarkable that hu-
man children already differ from chimpanzees in that this kind 
of communication seems to be present in one-year-old human in-
fants, but there is no evidence for it in great apes at all. This work 
provides further evidence that language is built on mental capac-
ity, rather than mental capacity being dependent on language. The 
mental prerequisites for language, moreover, begin to emerge well 
before language itself develops. But the emerging theory of mind 
may be the spur that allows language to unfold.
Chimpanzees, along with bonobos, are our closest living nonhu-
man relatives, and provide the best estimate of what communica-
tion was like prior to the emergence of true language. On the basis 
of current evidence, then, it seems likely that the additional step 
that allowed humans to share their thoughts arose in the course of 
Emergence of language
Emergence of
intentional
communication
Manual components
(gestures)
Vocal components
(words)
Bimodal period
Two-word
stage
Months
9
24
14
Figure 11. Frequencies of gestural and vocal communication in infants between 
the ages of 9 and 24 months, based on the work of Volterra et al. (2005). In 
ontogeny, as I have suggested in phylogeny, intentional gesturers appear well 
before intentional vocalizations. (Reprinted with permission of Taylor & Francis 
Group. Figure kindly supplied by Virginia Volterra.) 

Language and Mind   165
hominin evolution itself, after the split from the apes. Again, the 
critical ingredient may be recursion, the glue that seems to unite 
theory of mind, mental time travel, and language itself. 
In the next chapter, I place recursion in the context of the de-
bate about whether there is a profound discontinuity between hu-
mans and other animals, or whether the difference is one of degree 
rather than kind.


Part 4
Human Evolution
Whether or not recursion holds the key to the human mind, the 
question remains how we came to be the way we are—at once 
so dominant over the other apes in terms of behavior and yet 
so similar in genetic terms. In chapter 10, I set the problem in 
terms of the classic debate between Cartesian discontinuity and 
Darwinian continuity, and then consider some of the steps that 
made us the way we are. In modern-day science, it is difficult to 
avoid the conclusion that the human mind evolved through nat-
ural selection, although as we have seen, some recent authors, 
including Chomsky, still appeal to events that smack of the mi-
raculous—a mutation, perhaps, that suddenly created the capac-
ity for grammatical language. This is the “big bang” theory of 
language evolution, referred to in chapter 4. But of course we do 
have to deal with the seemingly vast psychological distance be-
tween ourselves and our closest relatives, the chimpanzees and  
bonobos. 
In chapter 11 I consider the possible steps by which we became 
human. The most critical period was probably the Pleistocene, dat-
ing from some 2.6 million years ago until around 12,000 years 
ago. Evolutionary psychologists have supposed that this was the 
epoch during which the human mind took shape, largely as a con-
sequence of the shift from an arboreal existence to a more terres-
trial existence as hunter-gatherers. But as I explain, we were lucky 
to make it through, since of the 20 or so hominin species so far 
identified through fossil remains, only one remains. 
That species is Homo sapiens, who emerged in Africa late in the 
Pleistocene, some time within the past 200,000 years. That species 
seems to have been endowed with sufficient qualities to ensure 
survival, and this is the topic of chapter 12. Some have argued that 

it was language that made all the difference, as though we talked 
the Neandertals out of existence, but this view is not in keeping 
with the Darwinian assumptions of this book. In chapter 12 I sug-
gest that it was not language itself that made the difference. Now 
read on.
168   part 4

10
The Recurring Question
What a piece of work is a man! how noble in reason! how infinite in 
faculty! in form and moving how express and admirable! in action how 
like an angel! in apprehension how like a god! the beauty of the world! 
the paragon of animals! 
—Shakespeare’s Hamlet II.2
So spoke Hamlet. Admiration of our own species is certainly one of 
our characteristics, although not all authors have been so fulsome. 
Blaise Pascal, the seventeenth-century French mathematician, had 
a more jaundiced view:
What a chimera, then, is man! what a novelty, what a monster, what 
a chaos, what a subject of contradiction, what a prodigy! A judge of 
all things, feeble worm of the earth, depositary of the truth, cloaca of 
uncertainty and error, the glory and the shame of the universe!1
Glory or shame, we cannot but marvel at our human achievements, 
although they may ultimately strangle us into extinction on our 
hitherto benevolent planet. The variety and ingenuity of human 
invention seemingly knows no bounds, ranging from jelly beans 
to jumbo jets, hamburgers to Hamlet, spears to space probes, in-
ternal combustion to the Internet, Beethoven to the Beatles—and 
cell phones. 
All of this is in marked contrast to the exploits of our nearest 
relatives, the African apes, who are restricted to ever more con-
fined regions of Africa, in conditions that by human standards 
are starkly primitive. If they survive at all, it will probably be due 
only to the benevolence of humans, and that certainly cannot be 

170   chapter 10
guaranteed. The forests of West Africa are the last stronghold of 
the African apes in the wild, but mechanized logging means that 
the numbers of apes (gorillas and chimpanzees) fell by more than 
half between 1983 and 2002, and there is no end in sight—no 
end to logging, that is, since the end of the line for the wild chim-
panzee seems all too clearly in view. To compound the problem, 
ebola haemorrhagic fever continues to run unchecked through 
the chimpanzee population, and hunting for so-called bushmeat 
has changed from a subsistence activity to a commercial enter-
prise with the rise of forestry.2 And yet we share a common an-
cestry with chimpanzees that goes back only about six or seven 
million years—an eyeblink on the evolutionary time-scale—and 
their genetic makeup is something over 98 percent identical to  
our own. 
It is no wonder then that we humans have been tempted to be-
stow on ourselves some extra quality, perhaps of a nonmaterial 
sort, that allows us to rise above our ape cousins, closer to angels 
than to apes. Here is how the Eighth Psalm put it:
What is man, that thou art mindful of him . . . ? For thou hast made 
him a little lower than the angels, and has crowned him with glory 
and honour. Thou hast made him to have dominion over the works of 
thy hands; Thou hast put all things under his feet; All sheep and oxen, 
yea, and the beasts of the field; The fowl of the air, and the fish of  
the sea.
Yea indeed. By hovering between ape and angel, we can then in-
dulge in self-glorification for our elevation above the animals, or 
in self-flagellation for our inability to achieve sainthood, an un- 
easy equilibrium exploited by religious authorities. In Paradise 
Lost, John Milton wrote:
The mind is its own place, and in itself
Can make a Heav’n of Hell, and a Hell of Heav’n.
But even if the path to heaven is an arduous one, are we really 
justified in supposing that our minds have somehow managed to 
transcend the physical laws of the universe?

the recurring question   171
Descartes’s Legacy
The idea that we might be possessed of a spiritual transcendence 
was given scientific and religious respectability by R né Descartes, 
sometimes considered the founder of modern philosophy. He was 
intrigued by mechanical toys, popular at the time, and this led him 
to wonder whether animals might be reduced to mere machines, 
whose behaviors could be explained by mechanical principles. He 
argued that this was indeed true of animals, and for the most part 
of humans as well, at least with respect to bodily functions and 
reflexive behavior. 
But we humans were unique, he thought, in possessing a flexibil-
ity of thought and action that could not be reduced to mechanical 
principles. This was most evident in language, whose unbounded-
ness defied any attempt to reduce it to deterministic laws, but more 
generally in free will. We seem to be able to choose what action to 
take independently of the forces around us. Descartes argued that 
these freedoms must have arisen from some nonphysical influence 
that entered the brain through the pineal gland, an organ conve-
niently located near the middle of the brain so that the incoming 
signals could be most effectively distributed. That influence could 
be attributed to God. Because it allowed for free will, it also gave 
us the opportunity to sin.
Descartes’s happy compromise established what is known as 
mind-body dualism, in which the nonmaterial influence that we 
call mind is separate from the mechanical influences that govern 
the body, and indeed much of the brain. This was a smart move by 
Descartes, since it allowed for both the continuation of religion and 
the development of neuroscience. Yet there is some doubt about 
whether Descartes was entirely objective in his views, or whether 
he was simply anxious not to offend the church. Certainly, there 
were those who disagreed with him. Perhaps the most notable of 
these was Princess Elizabeth of Palatine, granddaughter of James 
I of England and niece of Charles I, who challenged the idea that 
the human mind did not operate according to mechanical laws. 
e

172   chapter 10
Elizabeth, a devout but tolerant Calvinist, maintained a friendly 
correspondence with Descartes, but would not allow her letters to 
him to be published at the time. More than 200 years later her let-
ters were found, and they were eventually published in 1879.
Whatever Elizabeth thought, I suspect that today most people, 
even in nontraditional societies with no knowledge of Western 
philosophical thought, would agree with Descartes. Somehow, we 
don’t feel as though we are mere machines. We may well believe 
that animals are, and this belief may make us feel more comfort-
able about slaughtering animals for food, or exploiting them for 
labor or amusement—although we may draw the line at some spe-
cies, such as family pets, and we may see in the soulful eyes of the 
chimpanzee a close kindred spirit. In the Spectator onetime editor 
Frank Johnson complained of “boffins” who would reduce humans 
to robots, proudly declaring his belief in an immortal soul. “Hu-
man beings,” he wrote, “will always top the earthly hierarchy.”3 
Johnson probably echoes a widespread reluctance to believe that  
the mind can be reduced to a machine, despite the extraordinary 
progress of neuroscience and ubiquitous pizza-like images of ac-
tivity in the brain corresponding to our thoughts and emotions. In 
the last week of February 2004, the Reader’s Digest published a 
survey which revealed that eight out of 10 Australians believe that 
some people possess psychic powers, and seven out of 10 believe in 
the afterlife. A majority of people also believe that it is possible to 
communicate with the dead, and that extraterrestrials have visited 
the planet. In that same week, Americans voted Australia to be the 
country with the best image on the planet.4 
But we shouldn’t single out the Australians, since similar statis-
tics could no doubt be compiled from most other societies. One 
survey shows that about 90 percent of people in the United States 
believe in God, about 70 percent believe in heaven and the after-
life, and about 58 percent believe in hell.5 Indeed, a prominent cog­
nitive scientist at Yale University, Paul Bloom, has argued in his re-
cent book Descartes’ Baby that dualism itself is innate.6 We have, 
in other words, a natural-born disposition to believe that mind 
and body are distinct. Of course, this is not to say that they are 
distinct, but simply that we have been born with the instinct to 

the recurring question   173
believe them so. If dualism is wired into our brains, no wonder we 
have such difficulty accepting a mechanistic view of ourselves. It is 
an ironic thought, though, that the mechanical functioning of the 
brain might be what causes it to believe that it is not mechanical.
We should also not judge religion too harshly, since there are 
sound reasons to suppose that religious belief may itself have been 
a product of natural selection—not directly, perhaps, but as a con-
sequence of selection for the survival of groups. We humans are 
fundamentally social creatures, and religion provided one mecha-
nisms for ensuring group cohesion. Religion does pose problems 
for the theory of evolution, as we shall see below, and the ultimate 
irony may be that the explanation for religion lies in evolution itself.
Darwin’s Heresy
Although Descartes’ dualism had had its critics, the most serious 
challenge came from Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selec-
tion, which recognizes no fundamental difference between humans 
and other species. Not surprisingly, there was antagonism from re-
ligious and educational authorities, which continues to this day, a 
century and a half after the publication of On the Origin of Species 
by Means of Natural Selection. Not for nothing has evolution been 
dubbed “Darwin’s dangerous idea.”7 Darwin himself delayed pub-
lication of his book because he knew it would cause trouble. He 
had been warned, in fact, by the opprobrium that greeted an earlier 
anonymous publication entitled Vestiges of the Natural History of 
Creation, published in 1844, which dared to suggest that humans 
might have evolved from primates without divine intervention. 
Darwin was eventually persuaded to publish only because Alfred 
Russel Wallace had independently reached similar conclusions, 
and might publish before he did. Although Darwin had little to 
say on human evolution until his 1871 book, The Descent of Man, 
the implications were clear. As he correctly surmised, we are de-
scended from the African apes, and we now know with reasonable  
certainty that we share a common ancestor with the chimpanzee 
dating from around six or seven million years ago. 

174   chapter 10
Darwin’s theory of natural selection is one of the truly major 
insights in the history of science. The eminent biologist Theodosius 
Dobzhansky famously wrote that “nothing in biology makes sense 
except in the light of evolution,”8 and Darwinian theory is almost 
universally accepted among biologists, although they may quib-
ble about some of the details. Nevertheless it continues to cause  
controversy and opposition, especially in parts of the United States.  
Early in 2004 it was noted that the proposed curriculum in science 
and math drafted by the Georgia State Board of Education does 
not include the word “evolution,” to the consternation of scien-
tists.9 There has been persistent pressure, especially in the United 
States, to introduce an alternative to Darwinian evolutionary the-
ory known as “intelligent design,” which is thinly disguised reli-
gious doctrine dressed up to look like science.10
Intelligent design is explained in an increasingly influential book 
called Of Pandas and People, by Percival Davis and Dean Kenyon. 
As of August 2005 this book, then in its fifth edition, had sold more 
than 20,000 copies.11 Davis and Kenyon write: “Intelligent design 
means that various forms of life began abruptly through an intel-
ligent agency, with their distinctive features already intact—fish 
with fins and scales, birds with feathers, beaks and wings, etc.”12 
A classic case is the eye, said to be too complex to have evolved 
incrementally through natural selection. Actually, the eye is not an 
outstanding example of design, since the retina is installed back 
to front, and light has to filter through a network of nerve fibers 
before it reaches the light-sensitive rods and cones, and as a con-
sequence there is a “blind spot” where these fibers gather to leave 
the eyeball in the optic nerve. It makes you itch to take the thing 
apart and redesign it.13
But it is of course human evolution with which advocates of in­
telligent design are most concerned. We are so advanced relative 
to other animals, the argument goes, that we could not possibly 
have made the journey millimeter by millimeter, through the se-
lection of incremental changes that proved adaptive. Darwinian 
theory is caricatured as implying that the human condition is the 
result of random variation, as plausible as the possibility that an 

the recurring question   175
ape, given a typewriter, might adventitiously produce the plays of 
Shakespeare. Of course the theory of natural selection does depend 
on random variation, but selection of those variations that lead to 
increased biological fitness leads to systematic progression toward 
more adaptive forms. The trick is that evolution is a cumulative 
process, leading incrementally and inexorably toward greater fit-
ness. One end product was a Shakespeare who did write all those 
plays.14 The real problem with intelligent design, though, is that it 
needs an intelligent designer, and its advocates provide no infor-
mation on where that designer is to be found, or how to approach 
her to fix up that little problem with the eye. Merely to postulate 
an all-knowing, all-encompassing intelligent designer is bad sci-
ence, since it does not explain anything, and there seems no way 
to refute it.
Not all religions accept intelligent design. Writing in the 18 
January 2005 issue of L’Osservatore Romano, the official Vatican 
paper, Fiorenzo Facchini argued that intelligent design belongs to 
the realms of philosophy and religion, but not of science. He stated 
that “it is not correct from a methodological point of view to stray 
away from the field of science while pretending to do science.” The 
Vatican has for many years tolerated the teaching of evolution-
ary theories, and in 1950 a papal encyclical officially permitted 
Catholics to discuss Darwin’s theory of evolution. In another de-
velopment, on 20 December 2005 federal district court judge John 
Jones III ordered the schools in Dover, Pennsylvania, to remove 
references to intelligent design from the science curriculum, on the 
grounds that it is not science. 
Part of the reason for resisting Darwinian theory is that it seems 
to dislodge humans from the pedestal of superiority. We should not 
be too complacent, though. Human society is witness to extraordi-
nary accomplishments, but most individual humans have little un-
derstanding of the miracles that surround them. Most of us would 
be utterly helpless if transported back to the African savanna of a 
million years ago. Without matches, we would probably have diffi-
culty lighting a fire to keep predators at bay, let alone constructing  
a helicopter to get us out of there. There are probably only a handful  

176   chapter 10
of people who really understand the general theory of relativity, or 
the recent proof of Fermat’s last theorem. Alfred Russel Wallace, 
Darwin’s rival, was so taken with the difference between educated 
Europeans and primitive “savages” that he was prompted to invoke  
divine intervention to explain the difference—he wrote that “natu-
ral evolution could only have endowed the savage with a brain a 
little superior to that of an ape.”15 Darwin himself was appalled, 
and wrote to Wallace, “I hope you have not murdered too com-
pletely your own child and mine.”16 
In contrast to the theory of intelligent design, the theory of evo-
lution by natural selection is genuine science in that it is open to 
refutation, as Darwin himself realized. In the sixth edition of The 
Origin of Species, published in 1872, he wrote: “If it could be dem- 
onstrated that any complex organ existed, which could not pos-
sibly have been formed by numerous, successive, slight modifica-
tions, my theory would absolutely break down. But I can find no 
such case.” Descartes had suggested the pineal gland as the organ 
that might account for human uniqueness, but this turned out to be 
without foundation, although some parapsychologists still believe 
that it may be responsible for telepathy and other extrasensory 
powers. The nineteenth-century anatomist Richard Owen main-
tained that a brain structure known as the hippocampus minor was 
unique to humans, but Darwin’s friend and protagonist Thomas  
Henry Huxley disproved this by showing that all apes possess this 
structure. The role of the hippocampus minor was ridiculed, albeit 
in a befuddled way, by Charles Kingsley in his 1886 book The 
Water Babies:
You may think that there are other more important differences be-
tween you and an ape, such as being able to speak, and make ma-
chines, and know right from wrong, and say your prayers, and other 
little matters of that kind; but that is a child’s fancy, my dear. Nothing 
is to be depended on but the great hippopotamus test.
But what exactly is the hippocampus minor? Neuroscientists are 
familiar with the hippocampus, a structure in the brain that plays 
an important role in memory, and others may identify the hippo-

the recurring question   177
campus with that lovely undulating creature, the sea horse, whose 
feminist principles have ensured that it is the male who carries the 
unborn young. In the nineteenth century, the hippocampus minor 
was identified as a ridge in the floor of the rearward horn of the 
lateral ventricle, and was clearly distinguished from the hippocam-
pus itself, then called the hippocampus major. Owen’s idea that the 
hippocampus minor might be important probably owes something 
to the famed second-century anatomist Galen, who thought that 
the faculties of the mind resided not in the matter of the brain it-
self, but rather in the ventricles, which are the fluid-filled spaces in 
the brain. In any event, after the spat between Owen and Huxley, 
the term “hippocampus minor” disappeared, and was replaced by 
its original name, “calcar avis,” meaning cock’s spur. It now lives 
only in the most obscure corners of anatomy texts, and probably 
doesn’t do much for us at all.17
Of course if we do discover some complex organ that exists in 
humans but is not present in the other apes, this would indeed pose 
problems for Darwinian theory. Such a discovery seems unlikely. 
There can no longer be any serious doubt that we share our most 
recent common ancestry with the chimpanzee and bonobo, and 
slightly earlier ancestry with other great apes. Going further back 
we share ancestry, albeit ever diminishing, with monkeys, mam-
mals, and ultimately all living creatures. Indeed molecular analysis 
tells us that we are biologically closer to the chimpanzee than the 
chimp is to the gorilla, outward appearances notwithstanding. Any 
uniqueness we may claim has come about, not through the magical 
insertion of some new organ, or through divine intervention, but 
rather through evolutionary tinkering. This no doubt involved the 
modification of growth patterns, and the handy trick of using or-
gans that evolved for one purpose to achieve quite different ends. 
Just as the nose was modified to become the elephant’s trunk, and 
the forelimbs to become the wings of birds, so nature has taken the 
body and brain of an ape and turned it into a human. Just another 
ape, really, albeit one with some interesting properties.
Many of those properties have to do with what we are pleased 
to call mind. It is sometimes claimed that only humans have minds, 

178   chapter 10
or consciousness, but this is surely wrong. Other primates are 
clearly able to think. So indeed are other mammals, cetaceans, and 
birds. But it is probably true that we humans have evolved ways of 
thinking that are unique, although derived from mental structures 
that were already present in our forebears. Moreover, our minds 
are not the phantoms of Cartesian dualism. Modern neuroscience 
is relentless in showing us that what we think of as mind and con-
sciousness are due to the workings of the physical brain. Of course, 
we do not yet understand how consciousness itself comes about, 
although there is much speculation, so the identity of mind and 
brain must still be considered a working hypothesis. From a scien-
tific viewpoint, the only real contender for the seat of the mind, or 
even the soul, is the brain.
So how do our minds—or brains—differ from those of other 
species?
Is Recursion the Answer?
In this book, I have argued that recursion might provide the key. Re-
cursion might be said to capture several other properties previous  
claimed as unique to humans—language, episodic memory, mental 
time travel, and theory of mind. It also permits a degree of conti-
nuity, since each of those properties has precursors identifiable in 
nonhuman species. Language no doubt grew out of animal com-
munication (pace Chomsky), perhaps more directly from gestural 
than from vocal communication, as I argued in chapter 4. Episodic 
memory and mental time travel might be considered refinements 
of memory capacities already evident in other species. And apes do 
show at least some glimmerings of a theory of mind.
Some have argued that it was not language per se that gave rise 
to the distinctive character of the human mind, but rather the abil-
ity to think in symbols. This was the theme of Terrence Deacon’s 
(1997) book The Symbolic Species, and more recently of an article 
by Derek C. Penn, Keith J. Holyoak, and Daniel J Povinelli, men-
tioned in chapter 8. The use of abstract symbols does of course 
characterize human language, especially speech. I argued in chap-

the recurring question   179
ter 4, though, that the use of abstract symbols in language was 
more a matter of expedience than a distinctive component of the  
human mind. Chimpanzees and bonobos can be taught to use ab-
stract symbols. Use of symbols has of course been exploited in 
mathematics and engineering, leading to the development of sci-
ence and complex manufacture. But these are the accomplishments 
of Western civilization, and are generally foreign to indigenous 
peoples. In origin, at least, language is perhaps more a question 
of embodiment than of symbolic manipulation,18 and if it evolved 
from manual gestures, and indeed can persist in that form, we 
should look to processes not involving abstract symbols as the key 
to the human mind. That is why I suggest recursion as a possibility.
But is recursion truly a magic bullet, turning preexisting pro-
cesses from cramped stereotypy to the soaring creativity we see 
in stories, poetry, art, music, and dance, not to mention the more 
oppressive dominance of machines and skyscrapers? The evidence 
reviewed in chapters 8 and 9 that great apes may have a limited 
ability to read the minds of others, whether expressed in acts of 
deception or in communicative pointing, or even in scrub jays’ ap-
parent ability to prepare for a future event. We will need further 
careful analyses to determine whether such cases truly reflect a 
recursive ability, or whether they can be explained more simply 
in terms of association. One possibility, suggested in the previous 
two chapters, is that recursive processing can be discerned in some 
animal behaviors, but does not extend beyond a single level of 
embedding. Humans have the ability to share, to tell stories within 
stories, to develop devious social strategies, to play chess or poker, 
even to do mathematics and write computer programs that call re-
cursively on other programs—all of these suggest runaway recur-
sion that goes beyond first-order intentionality to perhaps as high 
as fifth or sixth order. 
All of this need not imply a profound discontinuity, or threaten 
Darwinian principles. An appropriate biological analogy might be 
flight. Kangaroos can hop, dolphins can leap out of the water, even 
humans can create a meter or two of distance between themselves 
and the earth—although we now do rather better since we have 
constructed flying machines, inelegant though they are. But the 

180   chapter 10
evolution of wings created a profound discontinuity from incre-
mental changes to limbs initially adapted to terrestrial movement. 
One small hop for animals became a giant leap for birds.19 
From Descartes to Chomsky, the case for a discontinuity between 
us flightless humans and other species has been based primarily on 
the supposed uniqueness of language. Although Chomsky himself 
has made no claims about the human soul, he is in other respects 
a self-confessed Cartesian,20 and has long argued that language is 
uniquely human, primarily because of its recursive properties. We  
saw in chapter 2, though, that some languages, such as that of the 
Pirahã, may not make use of recursion. The prior significance of 
recursion may therefore lie, not in language itself, but rather in 
the nature of human thought that guides language and supplies 
much of its content. I argued in chapter 5 that the act of mentally 
reliving past events is a recursive process, analogous to calling a 
subroutine into a main routine. We can do this beyond the level of 
first-order recursion when we imagine imagining yesterday what 
we had planned to do today. In chapter 6 I extended this notion to 
the imagining of future events, or the construction of stories, and 
in chapter 7 I argued that these properties underlie at least some of 
the characteristics of language. The recursive tangle of human rela-
tionships also supplies the material for gossip, one of our favorite 
pastimes. The recursive structure of at least some languages, then, 
owes something to the recursive manner in which we construct 
episodic scenarios.
In chapter 8 I discussed yet another recursive function critical to 
the human condition. The capacity to know what others are think-
ing is recursive in that the mental processes of others are called 
into our own thoughts, and guide our social interactions. Rudi-
mentary theory of mind can perhaps be inferred from the behavior 
of other species, but in humans goes beyond first-order recursion. 
The knowledge that we not only know what others are thinking, 
but also know that they know what we are thinking, may underlie 
what is perhaps the most fundamental human trait, the capacity to 
share. In chapter 9 I pointed out that language is just one manifes-
tation of this. Language provides for the sharing of knowledge.
In the next two chapters, I try to set these recursive functions 
into human evolution itself.

11
Becoming Human
Human life is a sad show, undoubtedly: ugly, heavy and complex.
—Gustave Flaubert
We are, let’s face it, great apes, sharing most recent common ances-
try with the chimpanzee and bonobo. The other great apes are the 
gorilla and orangutan. We set ourselves on the track to humanity 
some six or seven million years ago, when the so-called hominins1 
split from the line leading to modern chimpanzees and bonobos. 
It was a not altogether successful venture, since nearly 20 hominin 
species have been identified from fossil remains, but only one spe-
cies of hominin remains on the planet—see figure 12. That species 
is Homo sapiens. Lucky you.
In this book, I have argued that the mind of Homo sapiens is 
possessed of a recursive property unique among extant creatures, 
providing the creative potential for such diverse activities as re-
constructing past episodes or imagining future ones, telling stories, 
creating music or art, and manufacturing edifices and complicated 
machines. The other great apes may possess some degree of flex-
ibility in communication, especially through manual and bodily 
gesture, but their communications have virtually none of the gen-
erativity of human language. They do not tell stories. Whether 
they have episodic memory or can plan episodic futures remains 
a matter of contention. Nevertheless there is no indication that 
apes truly have a sense of their past mental lives, or that they can 
construct episodic futures, such as a meeting with a lover after a 
quarrel and imagining how it will play out. 
Can great apes understand what is going on in the minds of oth-
ers? They can surely gauge the emotional state of another individual,  

182   chapter 11
and perhaps take the visual perspective of another individual. Some  
evidence, reviewed in chapter 8, suggests that a chimp may have 
some understanding of what another individual knows or believes, 
although this remains controversial. There is no evidence that an 
ape’s understanding extends to higher-order recursion, such as the 
understanding that a watching individual understands that the 
watched individual understands this understanding! Of course 
these assertions are open to challenge.
We can assume, then, that the capacities of present-day great 
apes do not underestimate the capacities of the common ancestors 
of ourselves and the other apes. If anything they overestimate them, 
since chimpanzees have also evolved over the past six or seven mil-
lion years, and I don’t imagine that they once had but have since 
lost the powers of language, memory, or recursive theory of mind 
that we humans have evolved. It follows that these capacities must 
have emerged over that period. In this and the next chapter, then, 
I trace the stages of hominin evolution that may have led to our 
distinctive mental capacities. 
     
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
H. erectus
Neandertal
H. sapiens
H. heidelbergensis
H. ergaster
H. habilis
H. rudolfensis
A. afarensis
A. africanus
Ardipithecus
ramidus
Orrorin
tugensis
Sahelanthropus
tchadensis
Kenyanthropus
platyops
A. anamensis
A. garhi
P. boisei
P. aethiopicus
P. robustus
Millions of years before present
A. sediba
Figure 12. Species identified arising since the split from the chimpanzee line, and  
identified as bipedal hominins. A = Australopithecus, P = Paranthropus, H = Homo.

becoming human   183
Let’s start with what some regard as the defining characteristic 
of the hominins—bipedalism.
Standing Up for Ourselves
When the first humans rose to their hind feet, wobbled for millen-
nia, finally stood upright, achieved the erect posture, it must have 
been a sorry day but a touch of grandeur was on it.
—Gustav Eckstein, The Body Has a Head
To reverse the slogan of the pigs on George Orwell’s Animal Farm, 
“Two legs good, four legs bad,” we pride ourselves that we differ 
from the other apes—and from pigs—in that we strut about on 
two legs. 
The early hominins appear to have been at least facultative bi-
peds, which means that bipedalism was an optional form of loco-
motion, shared with the ability to climb trees. Facultative bipedal-
ism is contrasted with the obligate bipedalism of modern humans, 
where there is no alternative way of getting about.2 The earliest 
fossil tentatively identified as a hominin, known as Sahelanthropus 
tchadensis, was discovered in Chad in Central Africa, and is dated 
at between six and seven million years ago.3 This was very close 
to the time of the chimpanzee-hominin split, estimated at between 
6.3 and 7.7 million years ago by a technique known as DNA 
hybridization.4 Early indications from the mounting of the skull 
on the backbone are that this creature was capable of bipedal  
walking. Another early fossil, Orrorin tugenensis, dating from be-
tween 5.2 and 5.8 years ago,5 is perhaps more securely identified as  
a facultative biped, as is Ardipithecus ramidus, dating from between 
5.4 and 4.4 million years ago. Later hominins, including those 
known as australopithecines, were also bidedal walkers, as evident 
from the famous footprints attributable to Australopithecus afa-
rensis, popularly known as Lucy, and dated at around 3.5 million  
years ago.6 
Chimpanzees, bonobos, and the slightly more distant gorillas are 
so-called knuckle-walkers, which means they are basically quadru-
peds, using the forearms as legs, with the knuckles rather than the 

184   chapter 11
palms of the hand touching the ground. Because chimps and bono-
bos are our closest living relatives, it has generally been assumed 
that the ancestor we share with them, and indeed the earlier ances-
tor we share with the gorilla, must also have been knuckle-walkers.  
That is, the earliest hominins progressed from knuckle-walking to 
bipedalism. 
This idea has recently been challenged. To understand how the 
different postures of the great apes came about, we have to go back 
to the trees, whence we came. The most arboreal of the great apes is 
the orangutan, which is more distantly related to us than either the 
chimpanzee or gorilla. Nevertheless its body morphology is closer 
to that of the human than is that of chimpanzee or gorilla. In the 
forest canopy of Indonesia and Malaysia, orangutans typically 
adopt a posture known as hand-assisted bipedalism, supporting 
themselves upright on horizontal branches by holding on to other 
branches, usually above their heads. They stand and clamber along 
the branches with the legs extended, whereas chimpanzees and go-
rillas stand and move with flexed legs. Chimpanzees and gorillas 
may have adapted to climbing more vertically angled branches, in­
volving flexed knees and a more crouched posture, leading eventu-
ally to knuckle-walking as the forested environment gave way to 
more open terrain. If this scenario is correct, our bipedal stance may 
derive from hand-assisted bipedalism, going back some 20 million  
years. Knuckle-walking, not bipedalism, was the true innovation.7
It is Ardipithecus ramidus, though, who gives the clearest pic-
ture of what the common human-chimpanzee ancestor must have 
been like—see figure 13. Ardi, as she is known, has provided the 
most complete skeleton of the early hominins. Although her pelvic 
structure suggests she was a facultative biped, her foot was still 
adapted to grasping, with an opposable big toe. Her hand was 
closer to that of humans, and indeed of earlier primates, than to 
that of the chimpanzee or gorilla, which were adapted to knuckle-
walking. Like the human hand, Ardi’s hand could bend backward 
at the wrist, so she could move on flat hands and feet when on hor-
izontal branches, whereas the chimp and gorilla have stiff wrists 
to support knuckle-walking.8 As Owen Lovejoy suggests, Ardi, 
or rather her species, “has been bipedal for a very long time.”9 

becoming human   185
This is further evidence that the chimpanzee and gorilla, with their 
knuckle-walking, were something of a sideshow to the progression 
of bipedalism.10 It seems we did not evolve from knuckle-walkers,  
but represent the end point of a gradual transition from tree- 
climbers to bipedal walkers.
Bipedalism became obligate rather than facultative from around 
two million years ago, and as we shall see, it was from this point 
that the march to humanity probably began. That is, our forebears 
finally gained the capacity to walk freely, and perhaps run, in open 
terrain, losing much of the adaptation to climb trees and move 
about in the forest canopy. Even so, it remains unclear just why  
Figure 13. Reconstructions of Ardipithecus ramidus (from Science, 2009,  
326, p. 36, reprinted with permission of the illustrator, Jay Matternes.).
To view this image,
 please refer to the print version of this book

186   chapter 11
bipedalism was retained. As a means of locomotion on open ter-
rain, it offers no obvious advantages. Even the knuckle-walking 
chimpanzee can reach speeds of up to 48 km per hour,11 whereas 
a top athlete can only run at about 30 km per hour. Other qua-
drupedal animals, such as horses, dogs, hyenas, or lions, can easily 
outstrip us, if not leave us for dead. One might even wonder, per-
haps, why we didn’t hop rather than stride, emulating the bipedal 
kangaroo, which can also outstrip us humans.
Bipedalism is in many ways disadvantageous. It gives rise to back 
and neck problems, hemorrhoids, hernias, and the excessive pain 
of giving birth.12 Sciatica can be blamed on the fact that the spinal 
nerves and spinal discs are too close together, again a result of 
adaptations for our two-legged stance. Human babies take a long 
time to learn to walk, which makes them especially vulnerable to 
the sorts of predators that like to eat babies. A tragic example is the 
infamous dingo that carried off Lindy Chamberlain’s 10-week-old 
baby daughter, Azariah, at Uluru13 in Central Australia. Having just 
two legs for walking means that we are especially helpless if we lose 
the use of one of them—hopping is highly inefficient compared with 
the ease with which a three-legged dog, say, can still get around.14 
So much for intelligent design! The impression is that the two-
legged model, like the Ford Edsel, was launched before the market 
was ready for it. Or before it was ready for the market, perhaps.
But there must have been adaptive advantages. These may have 
had to do in large part with the freeing of the hands and arms for 
manipulative purposes, and perhaps leading eventually to recursive 
manufacture. As we shall see, though, manufacture emerged very 
late in hominin evolution, and cannot account for the pressures to-
ward bipedalism, which may go back to well before our common 
ancestry with the great apes, if the above scenario is correct. The 
freeing of the hands would have been adaptive for other purposes, 
though, such as grooming, carrying things, or fighting. 
Throwing
One possibility is that standing up allowed us to throw things, and 
so develop superior defensive and hunting skills. Charles Darwin 
suggested this when he wrote: “In throwing a stone or spear a man 

becoming human   187
must stand firmly on his feet.”15 In our modern sedentary lives 
we may have lost some of this ability, although you only need 
to watch professional baseball players or cricketers, or American-
style footballers, to see that some of us, at least, are still capable of 
prodigious feats of throwing. The ability to throw, with potentially 
lethal accuracy, may be more widespread among hunter-gatherer 
societies than among us sedentary city-dwellers. The eighteenth-
century explorer J. W. Vogel wrote that the Hottentots of southwest-
ern African “know how to throw very accurately with stones. . . .  
It is also not rare for them to hit a target the size of a coin with 
a stone at 100 paces.”16 Australian aboriginals were also said to 
be able to throw stones with enough accuracy and force to bring 
down wallabies and flying birds, dislodge nuts from the baobab 
tree, and knock fledgling birds out of high nests.17
In his book The Throwing Madonna, William H. Calvin sug-
gested that it was women who were the throwing experts.18 They 
stood as proud Amazons, holding their infants in their left arms so 
that they were snuggled close to the beating heart, and used their 
right arms to hurl objects at dangerous predators. This would have 
favored the selection, not only of a bipedal stance, but also of cir-
cuits in the brain that could program the precise timing needed for 
accurate throwing. Since the right arm is largely controlled by the 
left brain, this may have set the stage for the later evolution of 
speech, which also requires precise timing, and which is pro-
grammed in the left brain in the great majority of people. One 
might quibble, I suppose, that men seem to be better than women 
at throwing, or at least more likely to indulge in pursuits that in-
volve accurate throwing, although this impression can be partially 
dispelled by watching an elite women’s cricket team.
Eduard Kirschmann, in his book Das Zeitalter der Werfer (The 
Age of Throwers),19 restores male vanity by arguing that accurate 
throwing was indeed in the hands of the men, in part perhaps to 
protect the mothers holding their infants, and in part also to hunt 
prey. One imagines that selection of the best throwers was not 
solely a matter of survival against threat, but that sexual selection 
may also have played a role. Witness the spectacle of young men 
parading their skills in sporting arenas, be it in baseball, cricket, 
rugby football, discus, javelin, or an activity known as Australian 

188   chapter 11
Rules.20 Among the early hominins, the upright stance would also 
have freed the hands for carrying the objects to be thrown, in case 
one encountered some predatory beast in one’s path.
Certainly, there are good reasons to suppose that the upright 
stance would have greatly increased the leverage needed for power-
ful throwing. Watch a baseball pitcher and you see that the throw-
ing motion begins in the legs and feet, and unfolds through hips, 
torso, shoulder, arm, elbow, wrists, and fingers.21 This whole-body 
action maximizes kinetic energy. Of course one might still argue 
that adaptations for throwing don’t really explain bipedal walk-
ing,22 but Kirschmann also points out that the flexibility of the 
wrist required for powerful throwing would have hindered the use 
of the hands for locomotion. Mary Marzke makes the point that 
if bipedalism was an adaptation for locomotion, we should have 
evolved legs that were better designed for that purpose—like those 
of an ostrich, perhaps. In contrast, our legs are much sturdier, and 
the knee includes a locking device that has little to do with loco-
motion itself. These features may well have evolved to provide a 
more stable launching platform, not for locomotion per se, but for 
throwing and clubbing.23 
The idea that we evolved to throw also helps explain the mys-
tery of the seeming perfection of the human hand, described by 
Jacob Bronowski as “the cutting edge of the mind.”24 Adding to 
the power and precision of throwing are the sensitivity of the fin-
gers, the long opposable thumb, and the large area of cortex in-
volved in control of the hand. The shape of the hand evolved in 
ways consistent with holding and hurling rocks of about the size 
of modern baseballs or cricket balls, missile substitutes in modern 
pretend war. In real war, hand grenades are about the same size. 
Our hands have also evolved to provide two kinds of grip, a preci-
sion grip and a power grip, and Richard W. Young suggests that 
these evolved for throwing and clubbing, respectively.25 Not only 
do we see young men throwing things about in sporting arenas, 
but we also see them wielding clubs, as in sports such as baseball, 
cricket, hockey, or curling. In various forms of racket sports, the 
skills of clubbing and throwing seem to be combined.
Comparisons between the hand of the chimpanzee and that of 

becoming human   189
early hominins suggest increasing hominin adaptations for throw-
ing, although as we have seen, the chimpanzee hand may be a 
misleading comparison, as it probably adapted to knuckle-walking 
after the split from the common ancestor. Nevertheless the remark-
ably complete 3.3-million-year-old skeleton of a juvenile Australo-
pithecus afarensis, recently found in Dikika, Ethiopia, has curved 
fingers like those of a chimpanzee, apparently adapted for holding 
onto branches. The lower body of this little girl is adapted for bi-
pedal locomotion, but her upper body is still in many respects ape- 
like.26 Whether she threw things is not known.
It wasn’t as though the capacity to throw started entirely from 
scratch—or even from scratching—since present-day primates can  
also throw things, although not as accurately or powerfully as mod­
ern humans can. Capuchin monkeys, found in South and Central 
America, can throw stones at both moving and stationary objects, 
and have some semblance of both power and precision grips for 
throwing. In one study, they proved quite accurate at throwing 
stones into a bucket containing either peanut butter or a sweet 
syrup, the reward for accuracy being opportunity to lick the stone 
afterwards. They nearly always threw over-arm, about half the 
time from an upright stance. The female monkeys were just as ac-
curate as the males, although both were less proficient than the 
humans who were tested.27
Chimpanzees also hurl objects, such as branches of trees, in self-
defense. You may need to be on your best behavior when visit-
ing the zoo—Charles Darwin wrote: “As I have repeatedly seen, a 
chimpanzee will throw any object at hand at a person who offends 
him.”28 Watch out too when visiting the Cape of Good Hope, since 
Darwin also mentioned a baboon there who not only threw mis-
siles at people, but also prepared missiles made of mud for the pur-
pose. That animal has no doubt passed on, but may well have left 
his legacy among his descendants. When the bonobo Kanzi, our 
guest in chapter 3, was shown how to make simple flake tools, he 
did not adopt the hammering style used by the hominins of around 
two million years ago, but flung the stones at a hard surface, so 
that the flakes broke off with the impact.29 These great apes do 
not throw with the precision and power of a baseball or cricket 

190   chapter 11
player, but their ability and inclination to throw suggests that the 
subsequent emergence of throwing in hominins had a platform 
upon which to build.
Paul Bingham has argued that one of the characteristics that 
have reinforced social cohesion in humans is the ability to kill at 
a distance.30 Human societies can therefore be rid of dissenters in 
their midst, or threats from outside, with relatively little threat of 
harm to the killer! Nevertheless the dissenters, or the rival band, 
may themselves resort to similar tactics, and so began an arms 
race that has continued to this day. It started, perhaps, with the 
throwing of rocks, followed in succession by axes, spears, boomer-
angs, bows and arrows, guns, rockets, bombs, and nuclear missiles, 
not to mention insults. Such are the marks of human progress. 
People are still quick to regress to throwing things to express ag-
gression, as angry crowds in the trouble spots of the world throw 
stones, rocks, or bottles at those they love to hate. Throwing stones 
seems even to have infiltrated the literary establishment. George 
Bernard Shaw expressed his distaste for William Shakespeare as  
follows:
With the single exception of Homer, there is no eminent writer, not 
even Sir Walter Scott, whom I can despise so entirely as I despise Shake-
speare when I measure my mind against his. . . . It would positively be 
a relief for me to dig him up and throw stones at him.31
Whether or not it was throwing that sustained bipedalism in 
an increasingly terrestrial existence, it does at least illustrate that 
bipedalism frees the hands for intentional and potentially skilled 
action. It allows us to use our hands for much more than simply 
chucking stuff about. Moreover, our primate heritage means that 
our hands and arms are largely under intentional control, creating 
a new potential for operating on the world, instead of passively 
adapting to it. Once freed from locomotory duty, our hands and 
arms are also free to move in four-dimensional space, which makes 
them ideal signaling systems for creating and sending messages. 
Shaw might have considered the possibility of gesturing to express 
his contempt—a two-finger salute might have been just as effective 

becoming human   191
as hurling stones, assuming of course that Shakespeare recognized 
its significance.
Indeed, one might be tempted to suppose that bipedalism was 
driven by the emergence of language itself, especially if language 
evolved from manual gestures, as I maintained in chapter 4. Nev-
ertheless there is little else in the fossil record to suggest any sub-
stantial progress toward the human mind for the first four or five 
million years following the split from the great apes. For all the 
freedom of the hands, our early ancestors seem to have been very 
slow to make tools—at one time considered the mark of humanity. 
They may well have used twigs or stones as makeshift implements, 
much as modern chimpanzees do, but there is little evidence for 
the systematic construction of tools until well after the split from 
the chimpanzee and bonobo. Their bipedalism, moreover, was still  
relatively clumsy and inefficient. They retained some arboreal char­
acteristics, with long arms and relative short legs, and their brains 
were little or no larger than those of modern chimpanzees. It was 
not until the Pleistocene that we begin to see tangible signs of 
change, and a steady march towards humanity.
The Pleistocene
Toward the end of the Pliocene, which originated some 5.3 million 
years ago, the earth underwent global cooling, and the ensuing Pleis­
tocene gave rise to a series of crippling ice ages. The Pleistocene 
was once dated from 1.81 million years ago, but according to a 
recent vote has been redated to stretch from 2.588 million years 
ago to some 12,000 years ago.32 The Pleistocene also marks a shift 
from a largely wooded environment to more open savanna, forc-
ing further adaptations toward a terrestrial rather than an arboreal 
existence. Adaptation to the Pleistocene resulted in a new genus, 
called Homo, with characteristics rather different from the earlier 
australopithecines. 
The earliest members of the genus were Homo habilis and Homo 
rudolfensis, although it has been suggested that these species had 

192   chapter 11
not really attained Homo-like characteristics, and should be clas-
sified still as australopithecines.33 Another hominin, named Aus-
tralopithecus sediba, has recently been unearthed in South Africa, 
dating from around 1.9 million years ago, and may be truly tran-
sitional between Australopithecus and Homo.34 Homo ergaster, 
who emerged a little over 1.8 million years ago, clearly belongs to 
the genus, as does the Asian variant Homo erectus. Later variants 
were Homo antecessor, Homo heidelbergensis, Homo Neandertal-
ensis (Neandertals),35 and eventually the intrepid survivor, Homo 
sapiens. The features that identify Homo as the escapee from ape-
dom, and the increasing bearer of attributes we are pleased to call 
human, probably have to do with the very specific conditions and 
dangers of the Pleistocene.
An especially dangerous feature of the savanna was the pres-
ence of large carnivorous animals, whose numbers peaked in the 
early Pleistocene. They included at least 12 species of saber-tooth 
cats and nine species of hyena.36 Our puny forebears had previ-
ously been able to seek cover from these dangerous predators in 
more forested areas, and perhaps by retreating into water, but such 
means of escape were relatively sparse on the savanna. Not only 
did the hominins have to avoid being hunted down by these profes-
sional killers, with sharp teeth and claws, and immense speed and 
strength, but they also had to compete with them for food resources.
Consider then the plight of our forebears, increasingly forced to 
compete on the savanna with killer cats. One may wonder why we 
did not evolve to compete directly with these dangerous predators 
on their own terms, evolving greater speed, strength, and killing 
capability—as recommended by the king in Shakespeare’s King 
Henry V:
Then imitate the action of the tiger;
Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,
Disguise fair nature with hard-favoured rage:
Then lend the eye a terrible aspect;
Let it pry through the portage of the head,
Like the brass cannon; let the brow o’erwhelm it,

becoming human   193
As fearfully as doth a galled rock
O’erhang and jutty his confounded base,
Swilled with the wild and wasteful ocean,
Now set the teeth, and stretch the nostril wide;
Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit
To his full height!
But our forebears were scarcely preadapted for direct physical com-
petition with the tiger. Coming from forested environments, the 
early hominins were not built for excessive strength or aggression. 
Nor were they built for speed; otherwise an alternative strategy 
might have been to evolve more efficient ways to escape from pre-
dation, emulating not the action of the tiger, but rather the bound-
ing grace of the antelope. The facultative bipedalism of the earlier 
australopithecines did give way to obligate bipedalism, with a full 
striding gait and limbs better adapted to running. But this was 
scarcely sufficient to allow escape from a hungry lion, and seems 
to have been more specialized for endurance running, perhaps al-
lowing them to compete with other scavengers in the early Pleis-
tocene, and even run some mammalian prey to exhaustion in the 
heat.37 Yet again, our ancestors were not built for airborne flight, 
and hairy arms and heavy bodies would have required consider-
able modification before they could take to the skies to escape a 
mastodon. Flight, when it did emerge in our species, came much 
later, in part, I’m pleased to say, through the efforts of a New  
Zealander.38 
The solution seems to have been to depend on social intelligence 
and the development of cooperation. Darwin put it like this:
The small strength and speed of man, his want of natural weapons, 
&c, are more than counterbalanced, firstly by his intellectual powers, 
through which he has formed for himself weapons, tools, &c, though 
still remaining in a barbarous state, and, secondly, by his social quali-
ties which lead him to give and receive aid from his fellow-men.39
Sarah Blaffer Hrdy has argued that social bonding evolved first in  
the context of child rearing.40 She points out that great apes are 

194   chapter 11
loathe to allow others to touch their infants during the first few 
months, whereas human mothers are very trusting in allowing  
others to carry and nurture their babies. This is evident not only in 
daycare centers, but in the extended families units that character-
ize many peoples of the world. Among New Zealand Maori, for  
instance, initial teaching and socialization is based on a larger unit  
known as whanau, which is the extended family, including chil-
dren, parents, grandparents, cousins, uncles, aunts, and often be-
yond. The understanding of whanau is recursive, looping back 
many generations.
The close contact between infants and other individuals besides 
the mother would not only have enhanced survival, but encour-
aged the cooperative spirit that would later enable these forebears 
of humans to trust others with their own infants. A spiral of mu-
tual trust and caring would therefore extend down the generations. 
The exposure of infants to a variety of others would also foster 
theory of mind, teaching infants to gauge the intentions of others, 
and learn whom to trust. Hrdy argues that these characteristics 
predated the expansion of the brain, discussed below, and may 
even have established the initial conditions favoring an increase in 
brain size, and the evolution of such traits as social learning, teach-
ing, and language itself. 
The hominins therefore built on their primate inheritance of in-
telligence and social structure rather than on physical attributes of 
strength or speed.41 This is what might be termed the third way, 
which was to evolve what has been termed the “cognitive niche,”42 
a mode of living built on social cohesion, cooperation, and effi-
cient planning. It was a question of survival of the smartest.
Nevertheless it is unlikely that human intelligence can be ex-
plained simply in terms of the response to ecological challenges. 
Our Pleistocene forebears seemed to have conquered the threats 
posed by the inhospitable environment, but then discovered a fur-
ther threat—themselves. Paraphrasing an earlier seminal paper by 
Nicholas K. Humphrey,43 Richard D. Alexander writes that “the 
real challenge in the human environment throughout history that 
affected the evolution of the intellect was not climate, weather, 

becoming human   195
food shortages, or parasites—or even predators. Rather, it was the 
necessity of dealing continually with our fellow humans in social 
circumstances that became ever more complex and unpredictable 
as the human line evolved.”44 Humans have proven as adept at 
killing each other as at killing nonhuman predators—in fact more 
so, if you consider the extraordinary range of lethal weapons we 
humans have invented. Nevertheless successful adaptation must 
have depended as much on cooperation as on competition, lead-
ing to what has been called “runaway social selection.” Our lives 
depend on a subtle calculus of sharing and greed—of left-wing 
socialism and right-wing individualism, if you like.
Richard Wrangham has suggested that the secret of hominin 
evolution originated in the controlled use of fire, which supplied 
warmth and protection from hostile predators. From around two 
million years ago, he thinks, Homo erectus also began to cook tu­
bers, greatly increasing their digestibility and nutritional value. 
Cooked potatoes, I’m sure you will agree, are more palatable than 
raw ones. Other species may have been handicapped because they 
lacked the tools to dig for tubers, or the means to cook them. 
Cooked food is softer, leading to the small mouths, weak jaws, and 
short digestive system that distinguish Homo from earlier homi-
nins and other apes. Cooking also led to division of labor between 
the sexes, with women gathering tubers and cooking them while 
the men hunted game. At the same time, these complementary roles  
encouraged pair bonding, so that the man can be assured of some-
thing to eat if his hunting expedition fails to produce meat to go 
with the vegetables.45
Could social bonding have truly evolved around the campfire, 
with barbecued meat and vegetables, and gestured storytelling? It’s 
an attractive scenario, but it remains speculative in the absence of 
evidence for the use of fire early in the Pleistocene. The earliest 
convincing evidence dates from only about 800,000 years ago.46 
Let’s now examine some of the tangible evidence that the march 
from ape to human really began in the Pleistocene. I begin with the 
very organ that we think of (and with) as supplying the attributes 
that underlie our uniquely recursive mode of consciousness.

196   chapter 11
The Brain
Man by his large and choice brain has occupied the earth, and the 
house mouse, the field mouse, the house rat, the bed bug, certain  
flukes, worms, mites, ticks, lice, fleas, all have followed man 
around, and may, to that extent, be said to have acknowledged 
that large and choice brain, and to have cast their lot with it. 
—Gustav Eckstein, Everyday Miracle
I have already suggested in earlier chapters that functions such 
as language, with the vast vocabulary of words and underlying 
concepts, and episodic memory, with its storehouse of individual 
episodes, placed new demands on neural storage, and may have 
driven the dramatic increase in brain size that occurred during the 
Pleistocene. Recursion, too, must have added to the pressure, since 
it requires hierarchical structure, enhanced short-term memory, 
and sequential programming. 
But before we congratulate ourselves on our big-headedness, we 
do need to inject a note of humility. You might have thought that 
we humans have the largest brains of all in the animal kingdom, 
given that we consider ourselves to be top of the earthly hierarchy 
in terms of intelligence, but in fact we have to defer to the elephant 
and the whale, whose brains are more than four times as big as 
our own. The human brain is about the same size as that of a dol-
phin. Fortunately, the absolute size of the brain is not very reveal-
ing about intelligence. Large animals need large brains simply to 
control those big bodies, and deal with all of the information that 
arrives from their large surfaces.47 A more revealing index, then, 
may be the ratio of brain size to body size.
Here we come out rather better than elephants and whales, and 
better than our great ape cousins. Our brains weigh about 2.1 
percent of our body weights, while those of the chimpanzee and 
bonobo are about 0.61 percent and 0.69 percent respectively. The 
gorilla weighs in at about 0.64 percent and the orangutan at about 
0.55 percent. The figures for the bottlenose dolphin, Asian ele-
phant, and killer whale are 0.94 percent, 0.15 percent, and 0.094 
percent, respectively, so we ought to be able to outwit those crea-

becoming human   197
tures, if not beat them in fair combat. Unfortunately, though, the 
mouse comes out better than we do, with a figure of 3.2 percent, 
but I suppose we can beat that little creature in combat if we can’t 
outwit it. But in small birds, the ratio may be as high as 8 percent. 
Of course, they have light bodies, which no doubt helps inflate the 
ratio, but they do seem to have a nasty habit of contradicting every 
means by which we try to prove human superiority.48
Another problem is that, other things being equal, small animals 
have larger ratios of brain size to body size than do larger animals, 
so the raw ratio may not be a good index. A more sophisticated 
approach is to use a statistical technique called linear regression 
to try to predict brain size from body size. In this way, Harry J. 
Jerison figured out an index that he termed the encephalization 
quotient (EQ), which helps restore a suitable distance between hu-
mans and other species.49 This quotient turns out to be 7.4416 
in humans, followed by dolphins at 5.3055, and chimpanzees at 
2.4865.50 The elephant weighs in, as it were, with a quotient of 
1.8717, and rats have a miserly quotient of 0.4029. The mouse is 
blessedly reduced to a quotient of about 0.5, so we can stop worry-
ing about that. This quotient also pretty well gets rid of any serious 
challenge from birds, although comparison is difficult because the 
regression formula is rather different for birds. It is just as well, 
perhaps, that our large brains have given us sophisticated ways 
to figure out measures that prove that our brains are the largest. 
There may well be creatures out there busily working on formulae 
to prove that they, after all, are top dogs.
Some authorities have insisted that the best index of intelligence 
is the size of the neocortex, and not the brain as a whole. The neor-
tex is the outside layer of the brain, and the most recently evolved, 
and it also houses the functions that we like to call intellectual. 
Focusing on the neocortex has the decided advantage of getting rid 
of birds altogether, since they possess no neocortex at all. Robin 
Dunbar argued that intelligence is driven by social interaction, so 
that the larger the social group the greater the need for an enlarged 
neocortex, simply to cope with all of the social pressures. He then 
showed that what he called the neocortical ratio, which is the ratio 
of neocortex to the rest of the brain, increases with the size of the 

198   chapter 11
social group.51 Humans have the largest neocortical ratio, at 4.1, 
closely followed by the chimpanzee at 3.2. Gorillas lumber in at 
2.65, orangutans at 2.99, and gibbons at 2.08. According to the 
equation relating group size to neocortical ratio, humans should 
belong to groups of 148, give or take about 50. This is reasonably 
consistent with the estimated sizes of early Neolithic villages. Of 
course the modern city confused matters, but if you add up all the 
people you actually know then a figure of 148 might not be far 
from the mark.
Fossil evidence shows that brain size remained fairly static in 
the hominins for some four million years after the split from the 
apes. For example, Australopithecus Afarensis, whose most famous  
representative is known to the present-day world as Lucy,52 goes 
back about 3.5 million years, and had a brain size of about 433 cc, 
slightly over the chimpanzee size of about 393 cc, but less than that 
of the much larger gorilla at 465 cc.53 It was the emergence of the 
genus Homo that signaled the change. Homo habilis and Homo 
rudolfensis were still clumsily bipedal but their brains ranged in 
size from around 500 cc to about 750 cc, a small increase over that 
of the earlier hominins. Homo ergaster emerged a little over 1.8 
million years ago, and by 1.2 million years ago boasted a brain size 
of some 1,250 cc. Thus in a space of about 750,000 years, brain 
size more than doubled—that’s pretty quick on an evolutionary 
time scale. 
Brain size continued to increase at a slower rate. It appears to 
have reached a peak, not with Homo sapiens, dating from about 
170,000 years ago, but with the Neandertals, whose fossil remains 
have been found primarily in western Europe, and as far east as 
Uzbekistan. Analysis of Neandertal DNA suggests that we share a 
common ancestor with the Neandertals dating from about 700,000 
years ago, and our ancestral populations split from each other  
about 370,000 years ago,54 so the increase in brain size may have 
taken different trajectories. In some individual Neandertals, brain 
capacity seems to have been as high as 1,800 cc, with an average of 
around 1,450 cc. Brain size in our own species, Homo sapiens, is a 
little lower, with a present-day average of about 1,350 cc, but still 
about three times the size expected of an ape with the same body 

becoming human   199
size. This is rather surprising, as we usually congratulate ourselves 
as being more intelligent than the Neandertals, whom we prob-
ably drove to extinction by around 30,000 years ago (as though 
that were a smart thing to do). Nevertheless, the Neandertals are 
thought to have had larger bodies than we humans possess, and 
when brain size is calibrated against body size, we humans may 
have had the edge. As we shall see below, this final increase in 
brain size—the dash for the summit, as it were—seems to have 
coincided with an advance in technological invention over that 
which had prevailed for the previous 1.5 million years.
We are beginning to learn something of the genetic changes that 
gave us our swollen heads. One gene known to be a specific regula-
tor of brain size is the abnormal spindle-like microcephaly associ-
ated (ASPM) gene, and the evidence suggests strong positive selec-
tion of this gene in the lineage leading to Homo sapiens.55 Indeed, a 
selective sweep appears to have occurred as recently as 5,800 years  
ago, suggesting that the human brain is still undergoing rapid evo-
lution.56 Another gene known as microcephalin (MCPH6) has also 
been shown to regulate brain size, and one variant in modern hu-
mans arose an estimated 37,000 years ago.57 Other genes involved 
in the control of brain size that have undergone accelerated rates 
of protein evolution at points in human lineage have also been 
identified.58 
My favorites, though, are two genes that seem to have resulted 
in increased brain size through negative rather than positive selec-
tion; that is, they were once active genes that were inactivated. 
Moreover, both of them seem to have been inactivated just prior 
to the time when brain size increased in our own genus, Homo, 
perhaps providing the initial thrust that propelled us toward hu-
manity. One is a gene that encodes an enzyme that produces an 
acid that inhibits brain growth. This acid is absent in Neandertal 
fossils and in present-day humans, but present in other primates—
although down-regulated in the chimpanzee. It has been estimated 
that the gene was inactivated around 2.8 million years ago.59 The 
other gene encodes the myosin-heavy chain (MYH16) responsible 
for the strong chewing muscles in most primates, including chim-
panzees and gorillas, as well as the early hominins. This gene was 

200   chapter 11
inactivated an estimated 2.4 million years ago, leading to specula-
tion that the shrinkage of jaw muscles and their supporting bone 
structure removed a further constraint on brain growth—brawn 
gave way to brain.60 This change may have signaled a change of 
diet from tough vegetables to tender meat, or it may have had to 
do with the increasing use of the hands rather than the jaws to 
prepare food.61 
Conclusions about the roles of these last two genes in determin-
ing the size and shape of the human brain are of course speculative, 
and indeed controversial,62 but it is nevertheless interesting to reflect 
that we may owe our humanity in part to the loss of genetic infor-
mation. Prior to their inactivation, these genes seem to have been  
part of a heavenly conspiracy to prevent earthly creatures from 
becoming too intelligent. The idea that our humanity may have 
depended in part on a reduction in active genes also runs counter 
to the intuitive idea that the human mind evolved through the ac-
cumulation of new genes, such as the “grammar gene” proposed 
by Steven Pinker.63 One might be tempted to think that some genes 
are like taxes, holding back development, and the sooner we get 
rid of both the better.64
Is It Just a Matter of Size?
Although recursion may have depended partly on the sheer size of 
the brain available for computation, some areas are no doubt more 
critical than others. One such area is the prefrontal cortex, known 
to be involved in planning, and also in mental time travel, as we 
saw in chapter 6. It has been claimed, moreover, that the increase 
in brain size in humans is disproportionately large in the prefrontal 
lobes,65 although this is somewhat controversial.66 More detailed 
study of the frontal lobes nevertheless suggests that, regardless of 
its overall size, the prefrontal cortex may have been reorganized in 
the human brain relative to that in the chimpanzee brain. One area 
of the human prefrontal cortex is actually smaller than expected 
on the basis of overall brain size, but this was at the expense of an 
increase in the number of specialized regions in adjacent areas. The 
frontal pole of the prefrontal cortex appears to be especially en-

becoming human   201
larged in humans relative to apes, especially in the right side of the 
brain. One article summarizing these findings concludes that these 
developments have to do with the evolution of “self awareness, 
social problem solving, the ability to recall personal experiences, 
and the ability to project oneself into the future.”67 Just what the 
doctor ordered.68
Another critical difference between humans and other primates 
lies in the way in which the human brain develops from birth to 
adulthood. We humans appear to be unique among our fellow pri-
mates, and perhaps even among the hominins, in passing through 
four developmental stages—infancy, childhood, juvenility, and ad-
olescence. John L. Locke and Barry Bogin suggest that each of these 
stages contributes differently to the acquisition of language—see 
figure 14.69 During infancy, lasting from birth to age two and a half,  
infants proceed from babbling to the point that they know that 
words or gestures have meaning, and can string them together in  
two-word sequences. This is about the level that the bonobo Kanzi 
has reached, although we saw in chapter 9 that one-year-old infants 
point in a way that suggests the sharing of information, whereas 
chimpanzees do not.
Nevertheless it is the next stage, childhood, that seems to be 
especially critical to the emergence of grammatical language and 
theory of mind. According to Locke and Bogin, childhood lasts 
until about age seven, and is peculiar to humans. They write: 
Childhood is defined by several developmental characteristics, for ex-
ample, a slowing and stabilization of the rate of growth; immature 
dentition; feeding characteristics, such as dependence on older people 
for food; and behavioural characteristics, including immature mo-
tor control. The evolutionary value of childhood lies in the mother’s 
freedom to discontinue nursing her three-year-old, which enabled her 
to initiate a new pregnancy. Doing so enhanced reproductive output 
without increasing the risk of mortality for the mother, or her infant 
or older children, for in cooperatively breeding societies others were 
available to help care for the young.70
Childhood seems to be the language link that is missing in great 
apes and the early hominins, which may account for the fact that, 
so far at least, great apes have not acquired recursive grammar. But 

202   chapter 11
it is also during childhood that theory of mind, episodic memory, 
and understanding of the future emerge.71 Childhood may be the 
crucible of the recursive mind.
During the juvenile phase, from age 7 to around 10, children be-
gin to appreciate the more pragmatic use of language, and how to 
use language to achieve social ends. The final stage is adolescence, 
which Locke and Bogin suggest is also unique to our own species, 
and sees the full flowering of pragmatic and social function, in such 
activities as storytelling, gossip, and sexual maneuvering. Adoles-
cence also has a distinctive effect on male speech, since the surge 
of testosterone increases the length and mass of the vocal folds, 
Species
Chimpanzee
Australopithecus
H. habilis
H. erectus
H. sapiens
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Infancy
Childhood
Juvenile
Adolescence
Adult
Figure 14. Stages of development in chimpanzees and various hominin species. 
Note that the childhood stage emerges only in the genus Homo (after Locke and 
Bogin 2006).

becoming human   203
and lowers the vibration frequency. In common parlance, this is 
the stage when the voice breaks. Chimpanzee parents are perhaps 
fortunate that their offspring are denied this stage of development. 
Locke and Bogin focus on language, but the staged manner in 
which the brain develops may account more generally for the re-
cursive structure of the human mind. Recursive embedding implies 
hierarchical structure, involving metacontrol over what is embed-
ded in what, and how many layers of embedding are constructed. 
Early development may establish basic routines that are later orga-
nized in recursive fashion.
Migrations
Although the members of our genus who eventually evolved into 
Homo sapiens remained in Africa, there were evidently migrations 
both within Africa and out of Africa. Migratory patterns may sig-
nal a further step toward humanity. These migrations were not re-
peated seasonal events, as with many animals and birds, but were 
perhaps planned, involving the transport of resources and adapta-
tions to new environments. Instead of traveling back and forth be­
t­ween different locations, depending on the season, the migrating  
hominins tended to move to new locations, and then move on 
rather than returning.72
Remains of the genus Homo are found in Asia, where the spe-
cies is generally known as Homo erectus. The nearly equivalent 
species known as Homo ergaster stayed in Africa, but the increase 
in brain size within Asia seems to have been more rapid than that 
in Africa.73 The larger brain and striding gait of Homo may there-
fore have been associated with wanderlust. However, the simple 
idea that Homo ergaster simply wandered out of Africa to become 
erectus in Asia has been complicated by increasing discoveries of 
morphological and geographic variability within both Africa and 
Asia. By 1.7 million years ago, there were rather different species 
of Homo in areas as far ranging as southern Africa, equatorial east 
Africa, Russia, and Java, and stone tool deposits suggest further 
habitation in Israel, Pakistan, and northern China. This suggests 
that hominins may have ranged quite widely in the grasslands of 

204   chapter 11
Asia and Africa from as early as 3.0 to 3.5 million years ago, at a 
time when the Saharan and Arabian deserts did not exist as barriers 
to migration, and perhaps independently evolved Homo-like char-
acteristics.74 And yet our own species, Homo sapiens, was at first 
more of a stay-at-home, emerging in Africa some 170,000 years ago.
Later, though, it was Homo sapiens who exploded out of Africa 
to eventually populate—one might say overpopulate—the globe. 
That story will be told in the next chapter.
Tools
Another property once thought to differentiate humans from other 
primates was the manufacture of tools. We now know that chim-
panzee do make simple tools. For example, they fashion sticks for  
fishing termites out of holes,75 and make spears for jabbing into 
Ain Hanech
0
Dmanisi
Riwat
Koobi Fora
Sterkfontein
Mojokerto
Majuangou
Figure 15. Known or inferred locations of genus Homo by 1.7 million years 
ago. Circles represent radii of 1,000 miles. Dark gray circles represent  known 
populations, light gray circles represent locations where stone tools were made 
(after Dennell and Roebroeks 2005).

becoming human   205
the hollow trunks of trees to extract bushbabies, and then eat 
them.76 Chimpanzees in the Laongo National Park in Gabon use 
tool sets comprising up to five different stick and bark tools to ex-
tract honey from hives.77 Some of their tools are composites, such 
as the use of stones or clubs as hammers to crack nuts on anvils 
made of stone or wood,78 or leaf sponges in which several leaves 
are compressed into an absorbent mass used to extract water from 
tree holes.79 These activities do appear to involve some combining 
of elements, but still have little of the recursive complexity of hu-
man manufacture. In a review of evidence on tool manufacture, 
Benjamin B. Beck wrote, “Unquestionably man [sic] is the only an- 
imal that to date has been observed to use a tool to make a tool,”80 
and I know of no evidence to contradict this. In short, we hu-
mans—women as well as men, pace Beck—manufacture objects 
recursively, and it is largely because of our recursive understanding 
of manufacture that we have polluted the earth with immense cit-
ies, not to mention the cobweb embrace of the Internet.
Nevertheless advances in toolmaking were slow. There is little 
to suggest that the early hominins were any more adept at making 
or using tools than are present-day chimpanzees, despite being bi-
pedal, and it was not really until the emergence of the genus Homo 
that toolmaking became more sophisticated. The earliest innova-
tion seems to have been stone tools, with sufficient design features 
to suggest forward planning, and perhaps the beginnings of men-
tal time travel. The earliest such tools date from about 2.5 mil­
lion years ago, and are tentatively associated with H. rudolfensis.81 
These tools, relatively crude cutters and scrapers, make up what is 
known as the Oldowan industry. A somewhat more sophisticated 
tool industry, known as the Acheulian industry, dates from around 
1.6 million years ago in Africa,82 with bifacial tools and hand-
axes. At one time it was thought that these manufactured tools 
were the distinctive mark of humanity that set us apart from other 
species, but more recent research has suggested that other species 
can make tools of similar complexity. As we saw in chapter 6, the 
champions may be the New Caledonian crows that manufacture 
tools from pandanus leaves that are precisely tapered for the ex-
traction of grubs from holes.83 These tools seem on a par with 
those made by Homo erectus.

206   chapter 11
The Acheulian industry remained fairly static for about 1.5 mil-
lion years, and seems to have persisted in at least one human site 
dating from only 125,000 years ago.84 Nevertheless at some sites 
there was an acceleration of technological invention from around 
300,000 to 400,000 years ago, when the Acheulian industry gave 
way to the more versatile Levallois technology. Tools comprising  
combinations of elements began to appear, including axes, knives 
and scrapers mounted with hafts or handles, and stone-tipped 
spears. John F. Hoffecker sees the origins of recursion in these 
combinatorial tools,85 which were associated with our own fore-
bears, as well as with the Neandertals, who evolved separately 
from around 700,000 years ago.86 An early Neandertal example 
is the discovery of sophisticated wooden spears, dating from as 
early as 400,000 years ago, that were preserved in a coal mine in 
Schoningen in Germany. They were associated with the fossil re-
mains of horses,87 and suggest an advanced hunting technology.88 
The hominins who inhabited this site were Neandertals (or their 
predecessors), not the predecessors of Homo sapiens.
Tools are of course important to the human story, but there is 
little evidence that they were decisive in creating the human mind. 
To be sure, recursive elements were evident in tools from half a 
million or so years ago, but a truly manufactured world did not 
really emerge until after the appearance of Homo sapiens, and var-
ies widely between different cultures. My guess is that recursive 
thought probably evolved in social interaction and communica-
tion before it was evident in the material creations of our fore-
bears. The recursiveness and generativity of technology, and of 
such modern artifacts as mathematics, computers, machines, cit-
ies, art, and music, probably owe their origins to the complexities 
of social interaction and storytelling, rather than to the crafting of 
tools. I have more to say about technology in chapter 12.
Human at Last
It is generally reckoned that the species Homo sapiens who emerged 
some 170,000 years ago was “anatomically modern”—human at 
last. This was a large-brained species equipped with the intelli-

becoming human   207
gence and social understanding of modern humans. If you were to 
snatch an infant from that time, and raise that infant in the present- 
day Western world, he or she would probably adapt as well as 
any modern-born person to the exigencies of modern life, whether 
as stockbroker, ballerina, modern-day hunter-gatherer, university 
professor, or used-car salesperson. The Pleistocene had gradually 
shaped recursive modes of thought that allowed complex theory 
of mind and mental time travel, and allowed for the relaying of 
memories, plans, and stories for the betterment of both the society 
and the individual. 
But perhaps this scenario is not quite right. Human evolution 
was to go through another phase that was to transform society 
and create the vast complexities of civilization. It remains a mat-
ter of contention whether this involved biological change, but it 
was nevertheless sufficient to see the extinction of that other large-
brained species, the Neandertals. In other words, Homo sapiens 
had become human, but had not yet become modern, with all of 
the benefits and perils that term implies. 
To explain it, we need another chapter.

12
Becoming Modern
One of the few good things about modern times: If you die horribly on 
television, you will not have died in vain. You will have entertained us.
—Kurt Vonnegut, Cold Turkey (2004)
Homo sapiens emerged in Africa about halfway through the period 
known as the Middle Stone Age, which began around 300,000 
years ago and ended around 50,000 years ago. Early sapiens may  
have been anatomically modern, but in terms of culture and tech-
nology was probably not greatly distinguishable from other large-
brained members of the genus Homo. These included the Neander-
tals, who died out in Europe some 30,000 years ago, apparently 
eclipsed by the arrival, some 20,000 years earlier, of our own pred-
atory species.1 We do not know of course what the Neandertals 
might have achieved had they survived, but Homo sapiens brought 
a technological and cultural sophistication apparently unmatched 
by our hapless Neandertal cousins. For the origins of this flower-
ing of what we are pleased to call modernity, we need to look to 
Africa, whence our species came.
Understanding of the different lineages of Homo sapiens has 
come from studies of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), a form of 
DNA that is passed down the generations from mother to daughter. 
Unlike nuclear DNA, it is not involved in the processes of recombi-
nation that occur in eukaryotic reproduction. Changes in mtDNA 
arise only through mutation, allowing us to trace ancestry through 
females, uncontaminated by interference from us mere males. Anal-
ysis of mtDNA has identified four lineages in Africa prior to the 
exodus of some members of the species some 60,000 years ago.2 
These lineages, known as haplogroups, are imaginatively labeled 
L0, L1, L2, and L3. Routines are now available for estimating the 

becoming modern   209
population sizes of different lineages, and tracking them through 
time. These lineages, along with two others, M and N, which are 
found out of Africa, appear to have split off as shown in figure 16.
The population of the earliest lineage, L0, is estimated to have 
expanded through the period 200,000 to 100,000 years ago. This 
lineage presumably included the hypothetical individual known as 
“mitochondrial Eve,”3 the mother of us all, so to speak. Present-day 
descendants include the Khoisan of southwest Africa, speakers of 
the click languages that were exploited to great effect by the singer 
Miriam Makeba. The L0 and L1 lineages exist at higher frequen-
cies than the other lineages among present-day hunter-gatherers,  
who may therefore offer a window into the early history of Homo 
sapiens. 
Out of Africa
The L3 lineage is of special interest, because it expanded rapidly 
in size from about 60,000 to 80,000 years ago, and seems to have 
been the launching pad for the migrations out of Africa that even-
tually populated the globe. Of the two non-African lineages that 
are the immediate descendants of L3, lineage M is estimated to 
L0
L1
L2
L3
M
N
Figure 16. Branching of the early lineages (haplogroups) of Homo sapiens (after 
Atkinson, Gray, and Drummond 2009).

210   chapter 12
have migrated out of Africa between 53,000 and 69,000 years ago, 
and lineage N between 50,000 and 64,000 years ago.4 
Why did L3 expand so rapidly, and migrate from Africa? One 
suggestion is that L3 gained some cultural advantage over the 
other lineages, perhaps through the invention of superior technol-
ogies, and that this gave them the means to migrate successfully. 
Paul Mellars suggests that the African exodus was predated by 
advances in toolmaking, including new stone-blade technologies, 
the working of animal skins, hafted implements, and ornaments.5 
Some of the improvements in tool technology can be attributed 
to the use of fire to improve the flaking properties of stone, which 
L2
L2
L2
L3
L3
L3
L1
L1
L1
N
M
80,000–60,000 B.P.
Figure 17. Movements of human lineages within Africa between 80,000 and 
60,000 years ago (after Mellars 2006b).

becoming modern   211
dates from around 72,000 years ago on the south coast of Af-
rica.6 The use of fire for cooking, and perhaps for warmth and 
protection, probably goes back about 800,000 years,7 but its use 
in technological development suggests enhanced inventiveness and 
cognitive understanding. In excavations at Blombos Cave on the 
Southern Cape coast of South Africa, Christopher S. Henshilwood 
has unearthed ochre bars with carved abstract designs, and shell 
beads serving as personal ornaments.8 These and other artifacts 
from Blombos Cave and neighboring sites in South Africa are said 
to somewhat resemble much later artifacts in Europe, and may 
represent technologies exported by L3.9 
It need not follow that the L3 people were biologically more 
advanced than their African cousins, and it may well be that the 
exodus was driven by climate change rather than any technical 
superiority of L3 over the other haplogroups that remained in Af-
rica. During the last ice age, there were a series of rapid climate 
swings known as Heinrich events. One of these events, known as 
H9, seems to have occurred at the time of the exodus from Africa, 
and was characterized by cooling and loss of vegetation, making 
large parts of North, West, and East Africa inhospitable for human 
occupation. It may also have been accompanied by a drop in sea 
levels, creating a land bridge into the Levant.10 So out of Africa 
they went, looking no doubt for greener pastures.
The exodus seems to have proceeded along the coast of the Red 
Sea, across the land bridge, and then round the southern coasts 
of Asia and southeast Asia, to reach New Guinea and Australia 
by at least 45,000 years ago. Mellars notes similarities in artifacts 
along that route as far as India, but remarks that technology seems 
to have declined east of India, especially in Australia and New 
Guinea. This may be attributable, he suggests, to the lack of suit-
able materials, adaptation to a more coastal environment requir-
ing different technologies, and random fluctuations (cultural drift). 
One remarkable point of similarity, though, is the presence of red 
ochre in both Africa and in the earliest known human remains in 
Australia.11 Ochre was probably used in ritualistic body-painting, 
and perhaps in painting other surfaces.12 
Precisely how the dispersal reached Europe is not yet entirely 

212   chapter 12
clear. One notion is that a separate dispersal from Africa proceeded 
up the Nile Valley, but Mellars suggests instead it was the single 
southern migration that eventually split, with one arm proceeding 
to New Guinea and Australia, and the other proceeding north-
ward through Arabia or Iran to reach Europe and the Near East 
by 40,000 to 45,000 years ago.13
It is commonly suggested that the relatively sudden spurt of 
manufacture and symbolic behavior in the Middle Stone Age, and 
perhaps the exodus from Africa, signaled the emergence of lan-
guage. In chapter 2 we encountered Chomsky’s notion that lan-
guage emerged through some fortuitous mutation in a single in-
dividual, whom Chomsky named Prometheus. Timothy Crow has 
endowed Prometheus with the honor of initiating our species, with 
all of the characteristics that single us out from the other homi-
nins.14 As we saw in chapter 4, others have suggested that the criti-
cal mutation that gave us language occurred even later, perhaps as 
recently as 50,000 years ago, and this led in turn to the remarkable 
rise of sophisticated technology. John F. Hoffecker writes:
Modern human technological ability seems to be an integral part of a 
wider package of behavior (“behavioral modernity”) that developed 
in the context of the African MSA [Middle Stone Age] before 50 ka. 
Modern human technology exhibits many of the characteristics, most 
notably the creativity and structural complexity, of art, music, orna-
ment, and other forms of symbolism (including by implication syn-
tactical language) that are elements of behavioral modernity. Modern 
humans, as they dispersed out of Africa, adapted quickly to a wide 
range of habitats designed during the late African MSA or created in 
response to local conditions.15
But was it really language? In chapter 4 I argued that language 
evolved first as a system of manual gestures, shifting gradually 
through facial gestures to articulate speech. In this view, language 
itself evolved well before the emergence of sapiens, a product of the 
Pleistocene rather than specifically of our own species. It may be 
significant that click languages are associated with the descendants 
of L0, and may be residues of prevocal language. Click sounds are 
made entirely in the mouth, and some languages have as many 

becoming modern   213
as 48 click sounds.16 Clicks could therefore have provided suf-
ficient variety to carry a form of language prior to the incorpora-
tion of vocalization. Two of the many present-day African groups 
that make extensive use of click sounds are the Hadzabe and San, 
who are separated geographically by some 2,000 kilometers, and 
genetic evidence suggests that the most recent common ancestor of 
these groups goes as far as 100,000 years ago.17 
My guess is that gestures and perhaps clicks gave way to a more 
effective sound-based language at some point prior to the exodus 
from Africa. Indeed, some of the phonemes we use, as represented 
by letters such as /k/, /p/, and /t/, are not voiced, and may be the 
remnants of earlier click sounds. The incorporation of voicing may 
have involved a mutation of the FOXP2 gene, but as I explained in 
chapter 4, there is still uncertainty about precisely when the most 
recent mutation occurred, or whether it was truly critical to the 
evolution of speech. Alternatively, the switch to vocal speech may 
have been a cultural invention, adopted because of its practical 
advantages over manual forms of communication.18 And of course 
we still gesture as we speak,19 and children readily learn signed 
languages where speech is prevented.
But we don’t have to wave our arms about in order to com-
municate effectively, as illustrated by radio and the ubiquitous 
cell-phone. The emergence of speech may therefore have freed the 
hands from obligatory use of manual gestures to communicate. 
Perhaps this newfound freedom enhanced transportation, so the 
hand could be more readily used for carrying belongings in the mi-
grations from Africa, or in seeking more hospitable regions within 
Africa. The hands might also have been freed for the more effective 
use and manufacture of tools. At the same time, speech could be 
employed to explain manufacturing techniques, as illustrated by 
cooking shows on television. In short, my suggestion is that the 
emergence of modernity, and the flowering of manufacture and 
the other embellishments of modern humans, originated not with 
language but with the emergence of speech.20
The African record prior to the exodus certainly suggests the 
beginnings of modernity, although the development of technology 
and cultural complexity seems relatively meager compared with 

214   chapter 12
what was to come in the Upper Paleolithic, or Late Stone Age, 
which is generally reckoned to have ranged from some 40,000 
years ago to 12,000 years ago.
The Upper Paleolithic
This second wave of innovation was most pronounced in Europe 
and western Asia, beginning roughly when Homo sapiens arrived 
there. The Upper Paleolithic marked nearly 30,000 years of almost 
constant change, culminating in a level of modernity equivalent to 
that of many present-day indigenous peoples. Technological ad-
vances included clothing, watercraft, heated shelters, refrigerated 
storage pits, and bows and arrows. Elegant flutes made from bone 
and ivory have been unearthed in southwest Germany, dated at 
some 40,000 years ago,21 suggesting early musical ensembles, if 
not rock concerts. Flax fibers dating from 30,000 years ago have 
been found in a cave in Georgia, and were probably used in hafting 
axes and spears, and perhaps to make textiles; and the presence of 
hair suggests also that they were used to sew clothes out of animal 
skins.22 The people of this period mixed chemical compounds, made 
kilns to fire ceramics, and domesticated other species. Stone tools 
date from over two million years ago, but remained fairly static 
until the Upper Paleolithic, when they developed to include more 
sophisticated blade tools, as well as burins and tools for grinding. 
Tools were also fashioned from other materials, such as bone and 
ivory, and included needles, awls, drills, and fishhooks.23
Vanity seems to have evolved even further during the Upper Pa-
leolithic, as people began to decorate themselves not only with 
ochre, but also with threaded shell beads, tattoo kits, and other 
forms of personal ornamentation. Art became more sophisticated, 
as illustrated by the cave drawings of large animals in various re-
gions of Europe, especially France and Spain. The most spectacular 
is the Chauvet Cave in southeastern France, with lifelike drawings 
of horses, bison, deer, rhinos, and cave lions. Figurines dating from 
over 30,000 years ago in Germany represent the first appearance 
of fully rounded sculptures. The earliest-known is a sexually ex-
plicit figurine of a woman, dating from 35,000 years ago, recently 

becoming modern   215
discovered in a cave in south Germany. This remarkable sculpture 
shows exaggerated sexual features, including enlarged breasts, an 
enlarged and explicit vulva, and bloated belly and thighs. In this 
instance, at least, sex may have reared its ugly body but not its 
head, since the figurine has no head; in its place is a carved ring, 
suggesting that the figurine was worn as a pendant.24 This is early 
evidence, you may cynically think, of the female body treated as 
a sexual object, but a bone carving of an erect phallus found in 
southwestern France dating from around the same time restores 
some balance. Paul Mellars writes that one of his students sug-
gested that this and other phallic objects might have been girls’ 
toys.25
The most dramatic event of the Upper Paleolithic, though, was the 
extinction of the Neandertals, who had long inhabited Europe and 
western Asia before Homo sapiens, in the form of Cro-Magnon hu-
mans, arrived some 45,000 years ago.26 Whether the Cro-Magnons  
0
1 cm
Figure 18. A female figurine from Hohle Fels Cave in southwestern Germany.  
(Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature, Conard 
2009.)

216   chapter 12
simply adapted better to the ecology of the region or exterminated 
the Neandertals by more direct means is unknown, although the 
human record of warfare and genocide rather suggests the worse. 
Humans may well have wiped out the Neandertals in much the 
same way as they have wiped out whole communities of their own 
species, such as the aboriginal people of Tasmania. Genocide is 
an all too frequent escalation of intertribal conflict. Darwin even 
argued that such conflict was itself an important contributor to 
biological evolution:
Natural selection arising from the competition of tribe with tribe . . . 
would, under favourable conditions, have sufficed to raise man to his 
present high position in the organic scale.27
Hmmm.
But the Upper Paleolithic did not only enhance the capacity to 
kill. To some, it was the Upper Paleolithic, not the Middle Stone 
Age, that marked the transition to modernity, with its positive as 
well as negative aspects. Developments during this era have been 
said to comprise a “human revolution,”28 marking the true discon-
tinuity in the evolution of humankind. The anthropologist Richard 
G. Klein, for instance, has argued that the disparity in artifacts 
between the Upper Paleolithic and earlier developments in Africa, 
such as those at Blombos Cave described above, were such that 
some genetic mutation might have taken place.29 Only in the Up-
per Paleolithic, he thinks, did we emerge as truly modern humans, 
biologically as well as culturally. 
Again, then, we see an appeal to a sudden, fortuitous mutation 
as the key to human uniqueness—a second coming of Prometheus, 
perhaps. But the apparent disparity between developments of the 
Middle Stone Age and those of the Upper Paleolithic probably de-
pended more on demography than on any genetic change. One 
important factor may have been geographically local increases in 
subpopulation sizes, heightening the competition for resources and 
driving more complex social organization. We saw earlier that the 
haplogroup L3 underwent an expansion from about 60,000 to 
80,000 years ago that marked an increase in cultural and techno-
logical complexity, and prompted the migration from Africa. Mi-
gration into new territories would itself have increased the pressure 

becoming modern   217
for the invention of new technologies, including those necessary 
for adjusting to changes in climate and available resources. Migra-
tion can itself bring about rapid change in the size of a population, 
as migrants descend on the same territory, adding to the pressure 
for cultural innovation. It has been estimated that the density of 
the human population in Europe increased rapidly from the first 
arrival of the Cro-Magnons, and by around 45,000 years ago had 
reached the same density of population as that of sub-Saharan Af-
rica about 100,000 years ago.30
It is still not altogether clear, though, why there was a gap in 
the appearance of “modern” traits between 70,000 years ago in 
Africa and their appearance 40,000 years ago in Europe. Perhaps 
people actually on the move had less opportunity for innovation, 
or perhaps the artifacts they left are more scattered and less easy to 
find. And depopulation can have a reverse effect, leading people to 
lead simpler lives, and maybe even happier ones. Migration out of 
Africa might therefore have reduced population size, both among 
those who remained in Africa and among the bands that dispersed 
along the southern Asian coasts and into New Guinea and Austra-
lia, and north into Europe. But populations at various endpoints 
might then have built up, explaining bursts of new technology. An-
other factor must have been the catastrophic eruption of Mt. Toba 
in Sumatra around 70,000 years ago, which plunged the world 
into what has been described as a “volcanic winter,” or mini-ice 
age, which lasted several thousand years and probably reduced 
the world’s human population to around 10,000.31 We must hope 
that global warming doesn’t have a similar effect—and of course 
another calamitous eruption could occur at any time.32
The human condition is in any case one of extraordinary vari-
ability in both time and space, governed more by ecology than by 
physiology. 
Beyond the Stone Age
During the Stone Age, people were hunter-gatherers. Beginning 
perhaps 13,000 years ago, at the end of the last Ice Age, diversifica-
tion increased markedly. People began to domesticate wild plants 

218   chapter 12
and animals for their own purpose. One of the cradles of domes-
tication was the Fertile Crescent, so-called because of its fertile  
soil and half-moon shape. It corresponds broadly to present-day 
Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Kuwait, Jordan, southeastern Turkey 
and southwestern Iran. Other areas of domestication were China, 
Mesoamerica, and what is now the southeastern United States, and 
each of these regions in turn developed different agricultural and 
industrial technologies. Other areas of the world, such as parts of 
Africa, New Guinea, and Australia, retained a hunter-gatherer ex-
istence. Jared Diamond’s book Guns, Germs, and Steel attributes 
the vast differences between peoples to the exigencies of history 
and geography.
Diversity is probably exacerbated, though, by the tendency of 
groups, or tribes, to actively create distinctiveness. Within-group 
bonding is achieved in part by creating between-group difference, 
so that outsiders or freeloaders are kept out. Languages, for ex-
ample, evolve to the point of being mutually inaccessible, and I 
suggested in chapter 4 that one of the functions of language, es-
pecially in the form of speech, is to create impenetrable social for-
tresses. The bonding of peoples within those fortresses, and the 
separation of fortresses from each other, creates further diversity. 
People in different areas of the world also develop different hab-
its and skills. Culture is as much a mechanism for bonding as a 
mechanism for intercultural divergence, maintained through such 
institutions as religion, language, and custom, whether based on 
hunting and gathering, agriculture, industry, or trading. And sport, 
for that matter. One of the challenges of moving between countries 
that share even a quite recent cultural heritage is to understand 
and enjoy the local sporting obsessions, be it ice hockey in Canada, 
baseball in the United States, or Australian Rules—a form of foot-
ball, I think. And not all nations, I discover, share the New Zealand 
obsession with rugby.
Cultural diversity is especially evident in technology, which 
also provides superb examples of the recursive nature of human 
endeavor, with wondrous inventions ranging from internal com-
bustion to the Internet, railways to rockets, lasers to laptops, eye-
glasses to iPods. The economist W. Brian Arthur points out that 

becoming modern   219
technological invention consists of the hierarchical assemblies and 
subassemblies, combined in recursive fashion. Here is his descrip-
tion of a jet engine:
A jet engine has a main assembly that consists of an air intake system, 
a compressor system (to compress the inducted air for combustion), a 
combustion system (to provide high-energy gas flow for the turbine), 
a turbine system (to drive the compressor and provide reactive thrust), 
and an exhaust section. Each of these in turn is controlled, supplied, 
and monitored by other subsystems: the compressor system requires 
a variable vane actuating system (to set the vane angles appropriate 
to airflow velocity), and an anti-stall bleed system to control pressure 
surges (the tendency of the compressed air to blow backwards); the 
turbine system requires a blade cooling system, and a complicated set 
of shrouds and seals to prevent high-pressure gas leakage.33
And of course the jet engine is just a part of the larger assembly—
the jet aircraft itself.
One might be tempted to see such intricate technology as the 
crowning achievement of the recursive mind, creating an unlimited 
set of mechanical possibilities. It is as though the mind has spilled 
over to inhabit the earth, and indeed to control it. In its recursive, 
combinatorial nature, technology is like language—and indeed 
language itself might be regarded as a technological solution to 
the problem of communication. Unlike language, though, technol-
ogy is not universal. Some cultures exploit technology to the point 
of strangling the life out of the planet, and others retain relatively 
primitive technologies of the Stone Age. More importantly, tech-
nology is not so much the achievement of the individual human 
mind as the cumulative product of culture over many generations. 
The great British scientist Sir Isaac Newton wrote, “If I have seen 
further than others it is only by standing on the shoulders of  
giants.”34 Most of us would have no idea how to build a jumbo jet 
or a television set. These things have emerged through the ratchet-
like advances of culture.35 We have adapted to them, but doing 
so is surely no more sophisticated than the way aboriginal Aus-
tralians have adapted to the subtle cues that allow them to track 
down animals, or to find and identify edible plants.

220   chapter 12
Diversity does not preclude the mutual recognition of underly-
ing humanity. Daniel Everett, in his time among the Pirahã in Bra-
zil, met a culture as remote from his own as it is possible to find. 
Their language, religion, and mode of life were utterly different 
from anything he had previously experienced in the United States, 
and yet he eventually learned their language, even if he failed to 
convert them to his religion. He also developed lasting friend-
ships. Jared Diamond, an American, formed similar bonds with 
the native people of New Guinea, where he worked for a time. He 
records his friendship with Yali, a local politician. Although the 
white colonialists of New Guinea regarded the native people there 
as “primitive,” it was clear to Diamond that they were at least as 
intelligent as Europeans, and in Yali in particular Diamond rec-
ognized an intellect he considered superior to his own. Yali had a 
question for Diamond: “Why is it that you white people developed 
so much cargo and brought it to New Guinea, but we black people 
had little cargo of our own?”36 
The vast differences in cargo between the people of New Guinea 
and those of modern European, North American, or Australasian 
society can only reinforce my belief that the essence of humanity 
is not the things we make, but rather the way we think. Our recur-
sive understanding of each other, and our recursive ability to tell 
stories, whether fictional or autobiographical, is what truly sets us 
apart from other species, but aligns us with our fellow humans, of 
whatever race or culture.

13
Final Thoughts
It was a bright cold day in April, and the clocks were striking  
thirteen.
—George Orwell, Nineteen Eighty-Four
So began Orwell’s famous novel. Thirteen is a beautiful harmoni-
ous number. You can fit 12 equal-sized spheres around a central 
sphere, making thirteen in all, and now is the time to return to that 
central sphere. But my recursive mind thinks it knows what you’re 
probably thinking: Chapter 13 of Darwin’s book The Descent of 
Man is for the birds,1 and the thirteenth Tarot card is Death. 
Charles Darwin wrote:
The difference in mind between man and the higher animals, great 
as it is, certainly is one of degree and not of kind. We have seen that 
the senses and the intuitions, the various emotions and faculties, such 
as love, memory, attention, curiosity, imitation, reason, &c, of which 
man boasts, may be found in an incipient, or even sometimes in a well-
developed condition, in the lower animals.2
In this book, I have tried to argue that recursion holds the key 
to that difference in mind, underlying such uniquely human char-
acteristics as language, theory of mind, and mental time travel. It 
was not so much a new faculty, though, as an extension of existing 
faculties. Animals communicate, but in the course of human evolu-
tion recursive principles were added, allowing us to construct and 
understand an unlimited number of possible messages. Animals 
may have some awareness of the mental states of others, but the 
recursive principle extends this so that one may know that others 
know what one knows, providing for extended empathy and co-
operation. It also introduces enhanced opportunities for deception 

222   chapter 13
and exploitation, which drove theory of mind to deeper levels of  
recursion and Machiavellian intrigue. Animals have memory, but 
our forebears added a recursive principle that allowed them to 
insert past episodes into present consciousness, and generate po­
tential future episodes. The generation of episodes led also to story­
telling and fiction. I have suggested in this book that the recursive 
principle evolved in these facets of social life, allowing our fore-
bears to bond, and to share information within social groups, but 
also to compete, and to indulge in ever-escalating forms of warfare 
between groups.
I have argued that it was the special conditions of Pleistocene 
that drove these recursion-based extensions to the mind. Our pri-
mate predecessors had adapted to forested environments, and the 
relative safety of the forest canopy. Indeed, we still bear some of the 
bodily attributes of that adaptation, such as long arms and grasp-
ing hands, and a shoulder joint that still allows us to swing from a 
horizontal bar—or branch. And it is somehow comforting for the 
well-heeled to live in leafy suburbs, if not the urban jungle. The 
challenges that the open and dangerous savanna posed to a species 
that had adapted to a forested environment forced our hominin 
forebears into the “cognitive niche,” dependent on mutual support 
and communication, and attention to the microstructure of human 
behavior and interaction. 
Although recursion was critical to the evolution of the human 
mind, I argued in chapter 1 that it is not a “module,” the name 
given to specific, innate functional units, many of which are said 
to have evolved during the Pleistocene. Nor did it depend on some 
specific mutation, or special kind of neuron, or the sudden appear-
ance of a new brain structure. Rather, recursion probably evolved 
through progressive increases in short-term memory and capacity 
for hierarchical organization. These in turn were probably depen-
dent on brain size, which increased incrementally, albeit rapidly, 
during the Pleistocene. But incremental changes can lead to sudden 
more substantial jumps, as when water boils or a balloon pops. In 
mathematics, such sudden shifts are known as catastrophes,3 so 
we may perhaps conclude that emergence of the human mind was 
catastrophic.

final thoughts   223
The jump to recursion is perhaps best illustrated by the human 
ability to count. Many animals are capable of counting, at least 
in the sense of being able to distinguish between different num-
bers of objects, or of being able to give different labels to different 
numbers of objects. As I mentioned in chapter 3, the parrot Alex, 
late companion of Irene Pepperberg, could count up to six, using 
the actual spoken labels “one” to “six” to enumerate the number 
of objects—regardless of their identities. But humans, at least in 
literate societies, can count up to any number, using the recursive 
principle articulated in chapter 1. Adding this principle produces 
what seems a disproportionate leap forward, and may come as a 
revelation. A realization, an “Aha!” experience, a flash of insight, 
the glimpse of infinite possibility—these are the building blocks of 
the human mind. And yet they derive from incremental changes.
It is sometimes suggested that technology is the key to human 
evolution.4 To be sure, the marvels of modern technology seem to 
be the most distinctive marks of humanity on the planet. No other 
species has so transformed the physical environment, almost to 
the point of self-destruction. Recursive technology was certainly 
critical in the evolution of modernity, and indeed postmodernity, 
but it is not really a human universal. It varies hugely across dif-
ferent peoples on the planet—some cultures have largely retained 
a hunter-gatherer style of living, with relatively undeveloped tech-
nologies, but they are nevertheless fully modern with respect to 
language and social intelligence. This suggests that technology was 
a relatively late application of recursive principles, and not an obli-
gate one. Language, in contrast, is a human universal, and I suspect 
that theory of mind and mental time travel are too.5 
I have argued in this book that the extension of recursive prin-
ciples to manufacture and technology was made possible largely 
through changes in the way we communicate. Language evolved 
initially for the sharing of social and episodic information, and de-
pended at first on mime, using bodily movements to convey mean-
ing. Through conventionalization, communication became less 
mimetic and more abstract. In the course of time it retreated into 
the face, and eventually into the mouth, as late Homo gained vol-
untary control over voicing and the vocal tract, and the recursive 

224   chapter 13
ability to create infinite meaning through combinations of articu-
late sounds. This was an exercise in miniaturization, releasing the 
rest of the body, as well as recursive principles, for manipulation 
of the physical environment. 
It was this release of bodily resources, I think, that underpinned 
the development of technology, the cumulative application of re-
cursive principles to material construction. Although simple com-
binations of elements were established well before Homo sapiens 
emerged, in the form of multielement hand axes and spears, truly 
recursive technology was much later, and was much more evident 
in some societies than in others. Thus technology was not the driv-
ing force of recursion, but was rather a later discovery of the power 
of recursion in manufacture. But once recursive principles were in-
troduced into technological invention, their power was immense. 
W. Brian Arthur calculates that hierarchies in modern technology 
can be five or six layers deep6—and in chapter 8 I noted Robin 
Dunbar’s view that a depth of about five is what is necessary to 
find God.7
The switch from hand to mouth was perhaps the first of a se-
ries of changes in the mode of communication to have a dramatic 
influence on human affairs. The later invention of writing greatly 
enhanced the storage, accumulation, and sharing of knowledge. 
Libraries contain vastly more information than any single brain 
can hold. Written language also led to mathematics, ways of ex-
pressing complex relations that in turn led to more advanced cal-
culation, and further technology. The invention of the telephone, 
radio, television, and Internet are all communicative devices with 
obvious impact in the creation of a global society. Google makes 
limitless knowledge available with a few clicks of a mouse, so that 
libraries—and perhaps the human mind itself—are threatened 
with redundancy.
The complexities of the modern world are not of course the prod-
ucts of individual minds. Rather, they are the cumulative products 
of culture. Most of us have no idea how a jet engine, or a computer, 
or even a lightbulb, actually works.8 We all stand on the shoulders 
of giants. The combination of recursive principles and cumulative 

final thoughts   225
culture is indeed a powerful one. Thus simple gossip has evolved 
into the novel and apparently endless soap operas, simple tools 
into complex technology, simple dwellings into vast cities, rhythmic 
drumming into symphonies, counting into mathematics. Fermat’s 
last theorem, based on Fermat’s conjecture in 1637 that xn + yn = zn, 
has no integer solution for n > 2, was not proven until 1995. An-
drew Wiles took several years to construct the proof, which de-
pended on a number of other prior mathematical developments, 
each in itself a maze of recursive complexity, and Wiles’s proof still 
required a couple of articles for full presentation.9
And of course we don’t all build our minds in the same way. 
People may be mechanics, poets, musicians, accountants, shamans, 
lawyers, or authors silly enough to try to explain the human mind. 
In the terminology of William D. Hamilton,10 people people veer 
to the more social aspects of recursive thought, things people to-
ward the mechanical. But recursive principles, once unleashed, 
create possibilities beyond those that any single human mind can 
accommodate. It is sometimes said that we use only 10 percent of 
our brains, a notion roundly debunked by the late Barry L. Beyer-
stein.11 Yet it is also true that there are many feats of skill or intel-
lect that we could achieve if only we put our minds to it, as it were. 
I regret not learning to play the piano or ski,12 yet I’m sure I could 
have done these things had I set out to do so at an earlier age. But 
I suppose there is simply not the time or the motivation, or even 
the brain capacity, for any individual to develop more than a tiny 
fraction of the possibilities available from birth. In this respect, at 
least, humans are better understood as generalists than as bundles 
of specialized modules. And if I had taken up skiing, you might 
have been spared this book.
Coda
The driving force in our understanding of human language in the 
latter part of the twentieth century was Noam Chomsky, who 
saw that the recursive nature of language distinguished it from 

226   chapter 13
other forms of animal communication. Chomsky also understood 
that language depended on recursive thought, which he named I- 
language. To Chomsky, though, I-language remains mysterious and  
little understood, and was so deeply buried in the mind, without 
reference to the world, that it could not have evolved through nat-
ural selection. Instead, he argued, it must have emerged in a single, 
all-or-none step. Further, this singular event must have occurred in 
a member of our own species, Homo sapiens, perhaps within the 
last 100,000 years. 
In this book, I hope I have convinced you that we know much 
more about the nature of human thought than is incorporated in 
the concept of I-language. In this book I have focused primarily on 
human imagination—especially in the form of mental time travel—
and theory of mind. These processes make use of recursive prin-
ciples, and open up the human mind to endless possibilities. They 
are not fundamentally linguistic, as Chomsky assumed I-language  
to be; rather, it was language that adapted to thought, and not 
thought that was shaped by language. Finally, and critically, there is 
no reason to suppose that the recursive mind evolved in some single,  
miraculous step, or even that it was confined to our species. In-
stead, it was shaped by natural selection, probably largely during 
the last two million years.

Notes
Chapter 1
What Is Recursion?
1. For a useful discussion, see Fitch (2010b), who identifies three different mean­
ings of the word “recursion.” 
2. From Littlewood 1960, 40.
3. Lost in the Funhouse, by John Barth (1969).
4. This was actually a parody on the earlier poem by the seventeenth-century 
writer Jonathan Swift:
So nat’ralists observe, a flea 
Hath smaller fleas that on him prey, 
And these have smaller fleas that bite ‘em, 
And so proceed ad infinitum
My favorite, though, is Ogden Nash’s flea-like poem, said to be the shortest ever 
written:
Adam
Had ’em.
5. In case you’re old-fashioned, I use * rather than × to mean “multiplied by.”
6. Some readers may recognize the Fibonacci series from Dan Brown’s book 
The Da Vinci Code, where the first eight digits of the series provided the number 
of a critical bank account.
7. Pinker and Jackendoff 2005, 203.
8. Fitch 2010a.
9. Pinker and Jackendoff 2005, 230.
10. A case in point is a claim that starlings can parse recursive sequences of 
sounds (Gentner et al. 2006), leading to a headline in the New York Times of 
2 May 2006 that read, “Starlings may Shed Light on Language.” It turns out that 
there is a simpler explanation for what the starlings were able to achieve. This is 
discussed more fully in chapter 3.
11. Chomsky 1995.
12. The champion may be an African grey parrot, who could count accurately 
up to about six (Pepperberg 2000). This kind of counting is known as subitiza-
tion (Kaufman et al. 1949), as opposed to the iterative/recursive counting that 
allows us to count indefinitely. 
13. Chomsky (1988, 256) wrote that “human language has the extremely un­
usual, possibly unique property of discrete infinity.”
14. This is recursive embedding of mental states, in that Sir Toby’s anticipation 
is embedded in what Maria foresees, Olivia’s judgment is embedded in what Sir 
Toby anticipates, and so on. 
15. You can find it, needless to say, on the Web.

16. From Saki’s story “The hounds of fate”—see Saki 1936.
17. Hennessy 1995.
18. In some cases, iterative processes can achieve the same effect as recursive 
ones. Earlier, I showed how recursion can be used to generate infinite mathemati­
cal series, such as the natural numbers or the Fibonacci series, but the same series 
can be generated iteratively. To generate the natural numbers, for example, one 
can simply program an instruction that might read as follows:
Define function successor [while i > 0: print i + 1].
When the number 1 is entered, the string of integers will be printed forever, or the 
printer wears out—or someone kindly switches it off. Similarly, one might gener­
ate the Fibonacci series as follows:
Define function fibonacci [while i > 1: print {(i − 1)+(i − 2)}].
These definitions are not themselves recursive in that the function does not call on 
itself, but they can operate indefinitely if each output is fed back into the function 
as the next input. 
19. An example familiar to psychologists is factor analysis. The problem is to 
estimate so-called communalities, which are the (unknown) diagonal elements 
in a correlation matrix. You start by guessing what the communalities might be, 
compute a factor solution, from which new communalities are computed. You 
then repeat the process until the communalities stabilize. As a punishment for 
missing labs, I was once forced to compute a solution by hand. It took hours, but 
those were the days before computers.
20. The approach also owed much to Jerry Fodor’s (1983) book The Modu-
larity of Mind, although Fodor himself, in response to Pinker’s How the Mind 
Works, wrote a book entitled The Mind Doesn’t Work That Way. Part of his ob­
jection seems to be to what he calls the “massive modularity hypothesis,” which 
is the idea that the whole damn thing is modular, and part to the incorporation of 
modules into a Darwinian view of mental evolution. I use the term “evolutionary 
psychology” to refer to the group of psychologists who adopt the basic tenets 
laid out by Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby (1992). Other psychologists, such as 
myself, are interested in evolution, but don’t necessarily go along with all of these 
tenets.
21. Pinker 1997, 27. 
22. Human evolution during the Pleistocene is further discussed in chapter 11, 
although not specifically from the perspective of the evolutionary psychologists.
23. One of the main proponents was William McDougall (1908).
24. Bernard 1924.
25. Pinker 1997, 315.
26. Cosmides 1985.
27. New, Cosmides, and Tooby 2007. 
28. Quoted in Science, 318, 25 (2007).
29. Pinker 1997, 315. 
30. Mithen 1996.
31. Premack 2007, 13866.
228   notes to chapter 1

32. Read 2008. It is not clear whether the limitation is one of simple capacity, 
or whether chimpanzees lack the specific ability to store embeddings.
33. Throughout the book, I use the term “hominin” to refer to humans and 
their extinct bipedal ancestors, but not including chimpanzees and the other great 
apes. This is consistent with most current usage (e.g., Wood and Collard 1999), 
although some authors retain the term “hominid” for humans and their ancestry, 
and others include the great apes among the hominins. 
Part 1
Language
1. Christiansen and Kirby 2003, 1.
Chapter 2
Language and Recursion
1. Müller 1873.
2. Butler 1919, 95.
3. Chomsky 1957.
4. Hauser, Chomsky, and Fitch 2002.
5. Karlsson 2007. I found no instances of three, or even two, levels of center-
embedding in his article.
6. Ribena is a black-currant drink with a high concentration of vitamin C. 
It was heavily promoted in Britain during World War II, when other sources of 
Vitamin C were scarce. 
7. A rewrite rule can be interpreted to mean “replace the expression on the left 
with the expression on the right.” I’m told that rewrite rules are now considered 
by linguists to be an old-fashioned way of showing the structure of sentences, but 
here they make the point.
8. Chomsky 1975. For a useful summary, see also Chomsky 2010, which also 
includes his views on the evolution of language. 
9. Chomsky 2010, 59.
10. Crow 2010. See also note 4 in chapter 4.
11. Noam Chomsky, quoted in Piattelli-Palmarini 1980, 48. 
12. Chomsky’s terminology has changed—one might even say evolved—over 
the years. In his early work he contrasted surface structure with deep structure. 
Deep structure seems to have given way to universal grammar, and more recently 
to I-language. Needless to say, these changes are accompanied by subtle changes 
in meaning.
13. Christiansen and Chater 2008.
14. Life among the Pirahã proved physically hazardous as well as linguistically 
impenetrable to a Westerner—see Everett’s book Don’t Sleep, There are Snakes 
(2008).
15. Everett 2005.
16. Everett 2005, 629.
notes to chapter 2   229

17. Everett 2005, 634.
18. See the critique by Nevins, Pesetsky, and Rodrigues (2007) and the response 
by Everett (2007). The issue may depend on how recursion is defined. The Pirahã 
language may have no recursion in the sense of embedded phrases, but may still 
be recursive in the sense of Chomsky’s Merge operation. In the example of My 
saying John intend-leaves, the phrase My saying and intend-leaves might each be 
considered products of Merge, which are then themselves merged into the utter­
ance (not strictly a sentence as it contains no verb).
19. Karlsson 2007.
20. Evans 2003, 633.
21. See especially Evans and Levinson 2009 and Evans 2009. 
22. These various figures are from Evans 2009. 
23. One can see the same processes at work in modern English, although 
they are no doubt held in check by the unifying influences of the media—radio, 
television, newspapers, the Internet. Young people seek new expressions to 
differentiate themselves from their elders, gangs develop gangspeak, and racial 
groups evolve ways of speaking that cannot be attributed wholly to a different 
first language. African American English, for example, cannot be attributed to an 
indigenous African language. Women develop ways of speaking that differ from 
the more gruff intonations of malespeak.
24. Evans 2009, 46.
25. Pinker and Bloom 1990, 715.
26. Tomasello 2003, 5. 
27. Karlsson 2007.
28. Blatt 1957.
29. Chomsky 2010, 60.
30. The term grammaticalization is often taken to refer to processes that arise 
in languages that already have grammar. This implies a jump from protolanguage 
to language, which to my mind contains vestiges of “big bang” theory. An alterna­
tive view, which I prefer, is that language—and grammar—emerged gradually, so 
the very concept of protolanguage is unfounded. In NSL and ABSL, we are effec­
tively witnessing the emergence of new languages. For an alternative viewpoint, 
though, see Arbib 2009. 
31. For more detailed exposition, see Hopper and Traugott 2003, and Heine 
and Kuteva 2007.
32. Senghas, Kita, and Ôzyürek 2004.
33. See Kirby and Hurford 2002 for a review. 
34. Stokoe, Casterline, and Croneberg 1965.
35. Aronoff et al. 2008.
36. Hockett 1960.
37. Hockett 1960, 90.
38. Aronoff 2007. Aronoff is proud to call himself an “antidecompositional­
ist”—one who is opposed to the view that words can be broken down into parts. 
Of course words can be broken down into parts, but Aronoff argues that this is 
not the way people actually use words, or think about them. The issue is complex 
and somewhat technical, and readers are referred to Aronoff’s article for more 
230   notes to chapter 2

extensive discussion. Interestingly, Aronoff appeals to the “lexicalist” position de­
scribed by Chomsky (1970) as support for his view.
39. Of course it’s more complicated than that, since English has evolved in 
many ways and includes lots of borrowing. The suffix -ed derives from ancestral 
Proto-German. 
40. Givón 1971, 413. 
41. Pinker 1994.
42. This phrase was coined by Marler (1991) to account for the acquisition of 
birdsong, but borrowed by Locke and Bogin (2006) to account for the human 
acquisition of language.
43. Everett 2005, 622.
44. Christiansen and Chater 2008.
45. Hauser, Chomsky, and Fitch 2002. 
46. See Jackendoff 2002, 204.
Chapter 3
Do Animals Have Language?
1. Saki 1936, 122; first published in the collection The Chronicles of Clovis in 
1911.
2. Jürgens 2002.
3. Provine 2000.
4. Goodall 1986, 125.
5. Arcadi, Robert, and Boesch 1998.
6. Schaller 1963.
7. Slocombe and Zuberbühler 2007.
8. Hopkins, Taglialatela, and Leavens 2007.
9. It is commonly believed that chimpanzees are a good model for the common 
ancestor we share with them. As we shall see in chapter 11, this notion is chang­
ing. Chimpanzees have probably changed as much as humans have since the split 
some six or seven million years ago.
10. Snowdon 2004, 132.
11. Although, confusingly, it has also been maintained that gorillas have the 
most complex and frequent vocalizations of the great apes (Harcourt and Stewart 
2007).
12. Oddly enough, there is a novel by the late New Zealand writer Nigel Cox, 
called Tarzan Presley, in which Elvis is raised by gorillas in the Wairarapa district 
of New Zealand, before moving to the United States and establishing his career 
as a singer and rock star. As far as I know, there are no gorillas outside of zoos in 
New Zealand, although one or two may have invaded the rugby scrum. 
13. Aitken 1981; Sutton, Larson, and Lindeman 1974. 
14. MacLean and Newman 1988.
15. Hihara et al. 2003.
16. Roy and Arbib 2005.
17. Jarvis 2006.
notes to chapter 3   231

18. Knight 1998. 
19. Dawkins and Krebs 1978.
20. Or else, heaven help us, the sound of screwtops being unscrewed, since 
corks seem to be disappearing from Australian (and New Zealand) wine bottles. 
On the whole, I think this is a positive development, since I have yet to hear pa­
trons complaining to a waiter that the wine is screwed.
21. Cheney and Seyfarth 1990.
22. This does seem a little difficult to square with Jarvis’s idea that learned calls 
are more likely than fixed calls to attract predators. 
23. In this case it was the rock star who got the girl.
24. Mithen 2005. I am not entirely convinced. With very few exceptions, peo­
ple can talk, but very few of us can sing.
25. Deacon 1997, 225.
26. Blowing his own trumpet, so to speak; see http://www.reuters.com/news/
video/videoStory?videoId=1231.
27. Kenneally 2007.
28. Pepperberg 2000.
29. This may be a little unfair. Sheldrake and Morgana (2003) have provided 
a more detailed account in a journal called Journal of Scientific Exploration. You 
be the judge. 
30. Chimps and bonobos shared a common ancestry with humans until six or 
seven million years ago. Chimps and bonobos split into separate species about 
two million years ago. 
31. Arcadi (2000), who may have overlooked the vocal exchanges between 
politicians in his analysis.
32. Hayes 1952.
33. Ladygina-Kohts was perhaps the true pioneer of the study of chimpanzee 
language. She began her work in Moscow in 1913, and continued through the 
Russian Revolution, publishing her major work in Russian in 1935. The English 
translation did not appear until 2002.
34. This may seem to contradict the idea that chimp vocalizations can’t be 
learned. However, chimpanzees do emit a variety of bark sounds, including a 
pant hoot bark and a waa-bark, so Ladygina-Kohts may have mistaken a natural 
chimpanzee sound for an imitation.
35. Ladygina-Kohts 2002, 380. It should be said, though, that, Jodi was dis­
advantaged in ways other than being a chimpanzee. He was emotionally and physi­
cally deprived, despite Ladygina-Kohts’s attentions, and died at a young age. He  
was also a prerevolutionary child, whereas Roodi was born well after the Russian 
Revolution.
36. The often striking intelligence of dogs may have to do with a long history 
of domestication by humans. 
37. Kaminsky, Call, and Fischer 2004.
38. Savage-Rumbaugh, Shanker, and Taylor 1998.
39. I observe it in myself, too, when in Italy or France, where my level of 
understanding is not too bad, but I struggle to find the words to make my own 
contribution to the conversation.
232   notes to chapter 3

40. If you repeat the word rest, without pausing between repetitions, you may 
find that it has transmuted into the word stress. It may even transmute further 
into repetitions of the word ester.
41. Human infants, though, can learn to segregate words at an early age. By 
about one year of age, they can distinguish function words (like a, the, that, etc.) 
from content words (Shi, Werker, and Cutler 2006).
42. I am told that this term may now be politically incorrect, and one should 
call it “parentese.”
43. It might be interesting to insert these words in an otherwise meaningless 
sentence to see how Kanzi responds.
44. Neidle et al. 2000.
45. In his novel The Thirteen-Gun Salute, Patrick O’Brian assumes the animal 
was an orangutan. 
46. Gardner and Gardner 1969.
47. Patterson 1978.
48. This sounds enigmatic, but “child-side” is the local name for the place in the 
laboratory where children were studied.
49. Pinker 1994, 340.
50. Kanzi has since coauthored an article, along with two of his relatives, Pan­
banisha and Nyota (Savage-Rumbaugh et al. 2007). The corresponding author, 
though, is Sue Savage-Rumbaugh. 
51. Miles 1990.
52. Herman, Richards, and Wolz 1984.
53. Pepperberg 1990.
54. Bickerton 1995.
55. Premack 1988.
56. Jackendoff 2002. The implication behind protolanguage is that language 
emerged in a single step from that point, consistent with “big bang” theories of 
language evolution. Evidence on grammaticalization, discussed in the previous 
chapter, suggests that grammatical language evolved gradually. To my mind, this 
casts doubt on the notion of protolanguage.
57. Köhler 1925.
58. To argue that communicative gestures are a form of problem solving is not 
to deny them a role in the evolution of language. Problem solving may be indeed 
have sown the seeds for the later emergence of syntax. 
59. Tomasello 1999.
60. Povinelli 2001.
61. Whiten, Horner, and de Waal 2005.
62. Tanner and Byrne 1996.
63. Tomasello et al. 1997.
64. Pollick and de Waal 2007.
65. For gorillas see Pika, Liebal, and Tomasello 2003, chimpanzees see Liebal, 
Call, and Tomasello 2004, and bonobos see Pika, Liebal, and Tomasello 2005. See 
also Arbib, Liebal, and Pika 2008 for a discussion of these matters, especially in 
relation to the origins of language.
66. Chomsky 1966, 78.
notes to chapter 3   233

67. Hauser, Chomsky, and Fitch 2002.
68. Terminology can be confusing. As far as I can tell, FLN, I-language, and 
universal grammar all refer to essentially the same thing. The distinction between 
FLB and FLN seems a remarkably clumsy way of saying that human and animal 
language overlap in some respects but not in others. 
69. Hauser, Chomsky, and Fitch 2002, 1571.
70. Why starlings? Perhaps the authors of this study were inspired by Henry 
IV, where Shakespeare has Hotspur say 
Nay,
I’ll have a starling be taught to speak
Nothing but “Mortimer,” and give it him 
To keep his anger still in motion.
71. Gentner et al. 2006. This article was published in the prestigious journal 
Nature, and soon attracted attention in the media. The experiment was actually 
based on an earlier one by Fitch and Hauser (2004), in which tamarins proved 
unable to discriminate the embedded sequences. These authors made no claim 
that the test had anything to do with recursion as such, but rather compared 
the animals’ ability to distinguish a finite-state grammar (repeated pairs) from a 
phrase-structure grammar (embedded pairs), but they appear to accept that the 
phrase-structure grammar could be parsed by comparing strings of successive ele­
ments. To my mind, this somewhat trivializes their study, although it does make 
a technical point.
72. See, for example, Thompson 1969. 
73. I have explained all this more fully in Corballis 2007b. The original article 
on tamarins was published in Science, and the later article on starlings by Nature, 
but neither of these eminent journals would accept a critical commentary. I regard 
the technique used by the authors as a scientific virus that needs to be eradicated.  
The technique has also been picked up by researchers using brain imaging to find the  
spot in the brain responsible for recursive parsing (Bahlmann, Gunter, and Fried­
erici 2006; Friederici et al. 2006), but needless to say such endeavors are doomed 
to likely failure, and your intrepid author has been quick to pounce on this as well  
(Corballis 2007a).
Chapter 4
How Language Evolved from Hand to Mouth
1. Chomsky 2010, 58.
2. Bickerton 1995, 69. He has since modified his view somewhat, arguing that 
the roots of syntax might be traced to reciprocal altruism in primates, but he still 
appears to maintain that language in the genus Homo was essentially protolan­
guage, without syntax, until the emergence of Homo sapiens (Calvin and Bick­
erton 2000). More recently still, Bickerton (2010) outlines a scenario whereby 
language evolved more gradually during the Pleistocene.
3. Klein 2008, 271. The nature and implications of the archeological record are 
discussed more fully in chapter 12.
234   notes to chapter 4

4. Crow (2010) goes so far as to locate the genetic basis of human speciation 
in a particular gene pair, Protocadherin11XY, located in homologous regions of 
the X and Y chromosomes. According to this account, Prometheus was indeed a 
male, since the critical event occurred on the Y chromosome. Crow suggests that 
this event occurred within the past 200,000 to 150,000 years, and was the basis 
of human speciation.
5. Pinker and Bloom 1990, 708.
6. Pinker and Bloom 1990, 711.
7. Ploog (2002) shows how the neural basis for vocalization in humans differs 
from that in nonhuman primates.
8. Condillac 1971.
9. Condillac 1971, 172.
10. Condillac 1971, 174.
11. Condillac 1971, 175–176.
12. Darwin 1896, 87; emphasis added.
13. Wundt 1900.
14. Critchley 1975, 221.
15. Klima and Bellugi 1979; Poizner, Klima, and Bellugi 1987. Some are still 
resistant to the idea that signed languages are true languages. At a recent confer­
ence I presented the gestural theory, only to be told by a prominent linguist that 
signed languages were merely pantomime.
16. Two more recent books continue the trend. One is Armstrong and Wilcox’s 
(2007) book The Gestural Origin of Language, and the other Rizzolatti and Sin­
igaglia’s (2006) Mirrors in the Brain, which is built on the discovery of mirror 
neurons. 
17. Ramachandran 2000.
18. Arbib and Rizzolatti 1997; Rizzolatti and Arbib 1998. 
19. Binkofski and Buccino 2004.
20. As an aside, so to speak, it is worth mentioning here that the system in hu­
mans is generally biased to the left side of the brain. For some speculation about 
this, see Corballis 2004a.
21. Rizzolatti, Fogassi, and Gallese 2001.
22. Dick et al. 2001.
23. Arbib 2005; 2010. Grodzinsky (2006) has expressed reservations about the 
role of mirror neurons in language. 
24. Liberman et al. 1967. It should be noted, though, that the motor theory of 
speech perception is still controversial after more than 40 years, as is the role of 
mirror neurons—see Hickok 2009 and Lotto, Hickok, and Holt 2009. 
25. The perception of phonemes as invariant despite acoustic variation may 
depend on a region in the left inferior frontal sulcus—an area not far from Broca’s 
area (Myers et al. 2009).
26. Kohler et al. 2002.
27. Rizzolatti and Sinigaglia 2006.
28. Fadiga et al. 1995. 
29. Aziz-Zadeh et al. 2006.
30. Xua et al. 2009.
notes to chapter 4   235

31. Pettito et al. 2000.
32. Pietrandrea 2002.
33. Emmorey 2002. Although some signs are iconic, signers nevertheless dis­
tinguish signs from free pantomime, and aphasia for sign language leaves pan­
tomime unaffected (e.g., Marshall et al. 2004). Signers don’t seem to notice that 
some signs are iconic and some are not.
34. Pizzuto and Volterra 2000.
35. Burling 1999.
36. Saussure 1977.
37. Pinker 2007.
38. Shintel, Nusbaum, and Okrent 2006. See also Shintel and Nusbaum 2007 
for evidence that people respond to pictures more quickly if a spoken sentence 
describing the picture matches the motion represented in the picture. They match 
a moving object, such as a galloping horse, more quickly to the sentence if the 
sentence is spoken quickly, and match a stationary object more quickly if the 
sentence is spoken relatively slowly.
39. Hockett 1978, 274–275.
40. Frishberg 1975.
41. In Plato’s Cratylus, Socrates asks, “Suppose we had no voice or tongue, and 
wanted to communicate with one another, should we not, like the deaf and dumb, 
make signs with the hands and head and rest of the body?”
42. Zeshan 2002.
43. Evans 2009.
44. Pinker 2007.
45. Wood and Collard 1999.
46. Burling 2005, 123.
47. MacNeilage 2008. He is a compatriot of mine, but I’m sure I can bring him 
round.
48. Rizzolatti et al. 1988.
49. Petrides, Caddoret, and Mackey 2005.
50. Gentilucci et al. 2001. You are advised to try to keep your mouth shut when 
reaching for a large object, such as a pineapple.
51. See Gentilucci and Corballis 1996 for a review. 
52. Bernardis et al. 2008.
53. McGurk and MacDonald 1976. At the time of writing, and I hope still, 
you can experience the McGurk effect on http://www.youtube.com/watch? 
v=aFPtc8BVdJk.
54. Calvert and Campbell 2003; Watkins, Strafella, and Paus 2003.
55. The edited volume by Sutton-Spence and Boyes-Braem (2001) spells out 
systems used in several European signed languages.
56. Emmorey 2002.
57. Muir and Richardson 2005.
58. Studdert-Kennedy 1998.
59. Browman and Goldstein 1995.
60. Vargha-Khadem et al. 1995. 
61. Fisher et al. 1998; Lai et al. 2001.
62. Corballis 2004a.
236   notes to chapter 4

63. Liégeois et al. 2003.
64. Haesler et al. 2007.
65. Groszer et al. 2008.
66. Enard et al. 2009. The vast congregation of authors suggests that the effect 
may be due to alterations in circuits linking the cortex to the basal ganglia. This 
may have some bearing on the manner in which vocalization was brought under 
cortical control in humans. 
67. Enard et al. 2002.
68. Now deceased.
69. Krause et al. 2007.
70. Coop et al. 2008.
71. Evans et al. 2006.
72. Some of them evidently had red hair and fair complexions (Culotta 2007). 
Make of that what you will. Recent evidence from sequencing the Neandertal 
genome strongly suggests that the ancestors of non-Africans probably did mate 
with Neandertals, so there was some limited exchange of DNA (Green et al. 
2010).
73. Schroeder and Myers 2008.
74. See Fisher and Scharff 2009 for a recent review. 
75. P. Lieberman 1998; Lieberman, Crelin, and Klatt 1972.
76. Noonan et al. 2006.
77. See, for example, Boë et al. (2002; 2007), who argue, contrary to Lieber­
man, that the vocal apparatus of the Neandertals would indeed have permitted 
articulate speech, although his arguments have been questioned in turn by de 
Boer and Fitch (2010). Boë et al. (2007) also suggest that any restrictions on 
articulation, in human infants as in Neandertals, may have been due to imprecise 
motor control of the articulators rather than to the shape of the vocal tract.
78. Tattersall 2002, 167. See also previous note.
79. D. E. Lieberman 1998.
80. Lieberman, McBratney, and Krovitz 2002.
81. In other words, our foreheads are kind of bulbous.
82. Kay, Cartmill, and Barlow 1998.
83. DeGusta, Gilbert, and Turner 1999.
84. MacLarnon and Hewitt 2004.
85. P. Lieberman 2007, 39. Robert McCarthy of Florida Atlantic University 
has recently simulated how the Neandertal would have sounded when articulat­
ing the syllable /i/ (or ee), based on the shape of the vocal tract. It can be found 
on http://anthropology.net/2008/04/16/reconstructing-neandertal-vocalizations/, 
and compared with a human articulating the same sound. One observer described 
the Neandertal’s attempt as sounding more like a sheep or a goat than a human. 
But see Boë et al. 2002 for contrary evidence.
86. Konner 1982.
87. Kingsley 1965, 504.
88. The eloquent Italians, for example, gesture more than we undemonstrative 
Kiwis do.
89. Russell, Cerny, and Stathopoulos 1998.
90. Evans 2009.
notes to chapter 4   237

91. An even more parsimonious system is Silbo Gomero, a whistled language 
used by shepherds on the island of Gomero in the Canary Islands, which is re­
duced to two vowels and four consonants. It is perhaps an unfair example, though, 
because it is essentially a cut-down version of Spanish (Carreiras et al. 2005).
92. Everett 2005.
93. Salmond 1975, 50.
94. It depends on how the analysis is done (Evans 2009).
95. Saying it backwards probably helps a bit.
96. The commonly expressed idea that infants can discriminate phonemes of 
all the world’s languages (“Universal Theory”) has been challenged by Nittrouer 
(2001), but defended by Aslin, Werker, and Morgan (2002). 
97. Darwin 1896, 89.
98. The cooking of food, not televisions, although given the explosive language 
of some TV chefs one might wonder.
99. Corballis 2002.
100. McNeill 1992; Goldin-Meadow and McNeill 1999.
101. Wittgenstein 2005.
Part 2
Mental Time Travel
1. Hockett 1960.
Chapter 5
Reliving the Past
1. Forster 1995, 133–134.
2. Bruce, Dolan, and Phillips-Grant 2000.
3. The distinction between episodic and semantic memory was developed by 
the Canadian psychologist Endel Tulving (1983; 2002). 
4. That is as I remember it, of course. Others in the class may remember it dif­
ferently.
5. See, for example, Tulving et al. 1988.
6. Tulving 2002.
7. Burianova and Grady (2007) examined brain activation, using functional 
magnetic brain imaging (fMRI), while people retrieved autobiographical, epi­
sodic, and semantic memories. There was considerable overlap, suggesting com­
mon processes, but each kind of memory also elicited unique activation. Autobio­
graphical retrieval triggered unique activation in the medial frontal lobe, which 
is probably associated with representation of the self. Episodic retrieval uniquely 
activated the right middle frontal lobe and semantic retrieval the right inferior 
temporal lobe.
8. Wearing 2005.
9. Short-term memory, also known as working memory, holds information in 
consciousness for a few seconds, and is distinct from the semantic and episodic 
systems that make up long-term memory.
238   notes to chapter 5

10. This case was first described by Scoville and Milner (1957). For a more 
recent account, see Corkin 2002.
11. This theory was developed by Larry Squire and colleagues (e.g., Squire 
1992), but other models of hippocampal function have been suggested (e.g., 
Moscovitch et al. 2006).
12. See Tulving 2002 for a review.
13. Tulving 2001.
14. Hodges and Graham 2001. 
15. Mitchell 2006.
16. Loftus and Loftus 1980.
17. But not necessarily sober.
18. Kundera 2002, 122–123. 
19. Treffert and Christensen 2006.
20. Luria 1968, 22.
21. Parker, Cahill, and McGaugh 2006.
22. Pinker 2007 bases this estimate on the number of words in a desk (i.e., not 
an unabridged) dictionary. 
23. Loftus and Ketcham 1994, 39.
24. Roediger and McDermott 1995.
25. Burnham 1989. 
26. Bernheim 1989, 164–165.
27. In later editions of the book (e.g., 1994), Bass and Davis qualified their 
statement, indicating that symptoms of distress need not imply abuse. The hys­
teria over sexual abuse has largely abated since the 1990s, although there are 
undoubtedly still many innocent individuals whose lives were wrecked because 
of false accusations arising from falsely recovered memories.
28. The question of whether a memory is true or false is a classic one in a branch 
of science known as signal detection theory. Memory is often a weak signal, and 
one can be as uncertain of whether a memory is real or not as of whether a noise 
in the house is an intruder or not, or whether a pain in one’s chest is a signal of 
an impending heart attack. Where a signal is weak, there are two kinds of error 
one can make: one can fail to detect a signal that is truly there, or one can falsely 
detect a signal that is not there. If we apply that understanding to the question 
of memory for sexual abuse, one can suppose that abuse did not occur when in 
fact it did, or one can suppose that it did occur when it did not. Each error carries 
a cost. Failure to detect past abuse may leave a perpetrator free to continue to 
abuse, while false detection can result in innocent people being punished. Much 
of the political argument boils down to the question of which of these errors is the 
more costly. Many feminists appear to believe that it is better that some innocent 
people be sent to jail than to have perpetrators of abuse at liberty, while the basic 
legal tenet that one is innocent until proven guilty protects the innocent at the 
expense of failing to detect actual perpetrators. Judgments may be biased toward 
the former by aggressive therapy leading to implantation of false memories.
29. Hood 2001.
30. Pinker 1994.
31. The story of Genie and other so-called wild children is told in Newton 
2004. 
notes to chapter 5   239

32. Pavlov 1927. Classical conditioning featured as a major theme in Aldous 
Huxley’s Brave New World. 
33. In the politically correct terminology of modern experimental psychology, 
the term “participant” is preferred to “subject.” In this particular case, the term 
“subject” seems altogether more appropriate.
34. Watson and Rayner 1920.
35. Skinner 1957.
36. Skinner 1962. The title derives from Thoreau’s Walden. 
37. It was a word I had only recently discovered, and I rather liked the sound 
of it. I really didn’t know what it meant.
Chapter 6
About Time
1. Suddendorf and Corballis 1997; 2007.
2. Atance and O’Neill 2005. Suddendorf (2010) also suggests the term “epi­
sodic foresight.” 
3. See also Busby Grant and Suddendorf 2009.
4. Atance and O’Neill 2005; Klein, Loftus, and Kihlstrom 2002.
5. Ingvar 1979, 21.
6. Schacter, Addis, and Buckner 2007.
7. Addis, Wong, and Schacter 2007; Okuda et al. 2003; Szpunar, Watson, and 
McDermott 2007.
8. Botzung, Denkova, and Manning 2008; D’Argembeau et al. 2008; Hassabis, 
Kumaran, and Maguire 2007. 
9. The constructive nature of episodic memory was classically demonstrated by 
the British psychologist Sir Frederic C. Bartlett (1932).
10. Suddendorf and Corballis 1997; 2007.
11. Köhler 1925.
12. See, for example, Kamil and Balda 1985.
13. This inspired term was proposed by Suddendorf and Busby (2003). 
14. Clayton, Bussey, and Dickinson 2003.
15. Dally, Emery, and Clayton 2006.
16. Ferkin et al. 2008.
17. Roberts et al. 2008.
18. Bischof 1978; Bischof-Köhler 1985; Suddendorf and Corballis 1997.
19. Correia, Dickinson, and Clayton 2007.
20. See Suddendorf, Corballis, and Collier-Baker 2009 for a critique of this and 
other studies purporting to refute the Bischof-Köhler hypothesis.
21. McGrew 2010.
22. Hunt and Gray 2003.
23. This is the consensus of Whiten and eight coauthors (1999). See also 
Whiten, Horner, and de Waal 2005.
24. Boesch and Boesch 1990. 
25. Mulcahy and Call 2006. Curiously, though, bonobos, like gorillas, show 
little evidence of tool use in the wild (McGrew 2010).
240   notes to chapter 6

26. See Suddendorf 2006 for a critique.
27. Bang on.
28. It has been suggested that the linear concept of time did not emerge until 
late antiquity, and that earlier understanding was cyclical (Butterfield 1981).
29. Everett 2005.
30. Pettit 2002.
31. Andrews and Stringer 1993.
32. Markus and Nurius 1986.
33. James 1910.
34. Markus and Nurius 1986, 954. 
35. Neisser 2008, 88. 
Chapter 7
The Grammar of Time
1. From a conversation with Freddy Gray, reported in The Spectator of 10 
April 2010.
2. Pinker 2003, 27.
3. Yes, I know—even this book is something of a just-so story.
4. Hebb had a distinctly mediocre undergraduate record, and his initial inten­
tion was to become a novelist. 
5. See also Corballis and Suddendorf 2007.
6. Tulving 2002.
7. Pinker 2007. As I mentioned before, this estimate is based on the number of 
words in a common dictionary.
8. Deacon 1997.
9. Liszkowski et al. 2009.
10. Lin 2006. Aspectual markers are formally distinguished from tense, and 
have to do with the temporal flow rather than the location in time. In English, 
for example, the sentences “I talk” and “I am talking” are both present tense, but 
are distinguished by aspect, with the first representing a habitual activity and the 
second a progressive or continuous one. 
11. It’s time I got this damn book written.
12. Reichenbach 1947.
13. Núñez and Sweetser 2006.
14. Chen 2007.
15. Everett 2005. It should be said that Everett’s analysis is controversial, as 
evident in the commentaries following his article. Yet he and his family are the 
only outsiders who know the language of the Pirahã, and are best equipped to 
pronounce on its properties, at least to those who don’t speak it.
16. In some respects Everett is not entirely consistent. For instance he does note 
that the Pirahã are “afraid of evil spirits” (2005, 623). To the Western eye, evil 
spirits might well be seen as fictitious, although perhaps to the Pirahã they are 
seen as part of everyday reality. Again, Everett states that “Pirahã repeat and em­
bellish these stories” (633), but the claim is that the stories are based on firsthand 
experience, and are not fictional. 
notes to chapter 7   241

17. Everett 2005, 632.
18. Whorf 1956, 57–58.
19. Malotki 1983. It may well be that Everett also underestimated the Pirahã 
sense of time.
20. They should be so lucky.
21. Skinner 1957.
22. Westen 1997, 530. Nevertheless Skinner was interested in psychoanaly­
sis, and even wanted to be psychoanalyzed—but was turned down! (Overskeid 
2007).
23. This was the main theme of Chomsky’s famous 1959 review of Skinner’s 
1957 book Verbal Behavior.
24. Frege 1980, 79. To most linguists, though, words are but a step in the 
hierarchy that proceeds from phonemes to morphemes to words. As we saw in 
chapter 2, though, words may be the true primitives in an evolutionary sense, 
with phonology and morphology emerging as a result of pressure to create dis­
tinctions (Aronoff 2007). 
25. Horne Tooke 1857. Objects are represented by nouns and actions by verbs. 
Technically, though, the object/action distinction is not the same as the noun/verb 
distinction. Many nouns (such as love or coherence) do not represent objects, and 
many verbs (such as enjoy or wonder) do not represent actions. The idea that the 
first words were nouns and verbs actually goes back to Plato.
26. In case you’re traveling this year, they are Warao in Venezuela, Nadëb in 
Brazil, Wik Ngathana in northeastern Australia, and Tobati in West Papua New 
Guinea.
27. Aronoff et al. 2008. 
28. A curious exception is C. P. Snow’s last novel, A Coat of Varnish, published 
in 1979. The murderer is never revealed.
29. It can go the other way. The 1994 movie Heavenly Creatures, directed by 
Peter Jackson, is based on the true story of two New Zealand schoolgirls who 
murdered the mother of one of them. They were of course caught, and one of 
them is now an internationally known author of murder stories. 
30. Maybe we should add quarks and leptons and bosons, and the other enti­
ties postulated by modern theoretical physics. 
31. Wilson 2002, 64.
32. Boyd 2009.
33. There must surely be limits to this. Science depends on the discovery of 
truth and, one may hope, is adaptive. This adaptiveness may be foiled by belief 
in falsehood.
34. Or so I believe, God help me.
35. Boyd 2009, 206.
Chapter 8 
Mind Reading
1. Randi 1982. The James Randi Educational Foundation was established in 
1996 to further Randi’s work. It offers a large monetary prize to anyone who can 
242   notes to chapter 8

demonstrate psychic powers. As of 10 July 2007 this long-standing offer remains 
unclaimed, and the award stands at $1,000,000. See www.randi.org for updates. 
2. Marks and Kammann 1980.
3. Sheldrake 1999. Once again, the intrepid David Marks has struck, in the 
new edition of his earlier book with Kammann (Marks 2000). One wonders if 
Sheldrake saw it coming. 
4. Darwin 1872, 357—a long quote, to be sure, but the image of Darwin pull­
ing faces and trying to look savage is too much to resist.
5. Piaget 1928.
6. Borke 1975. One might have thought, though, that mountains would have 
been pretty familiar to Swiss children. 
7. Southgate, Senju, and Csibra 2007. The authors included a familiarization 
phase to ensure that the infants would look to where the actor would retrieve 
a ball when it was actually present, as well as variations to rule out other pos­
sibilities, such as the infants simply looking to where the ball was most recently 
placed. 
8. I suppose the catwalk might make you wonder, although those young women 
seem scarcely built for reproduction.
9. Cosmides and Tooby 1992.
10. Trivers 1974.
11. Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby 1992.
12. The term was inspired by Franz B. M. de Waal, whose 1982 book Chim-
panzee Politics noted that some of the social strategies used by chimpanzees had 
a Machiavellian flavor. Much has been written on the question of whether chim­
panzees and other primates are truly Machiavellian, or possess what has been 
termed “theory of mind”—the ability to take on the mental perspectives of others 
(e.g., Byrne and Whiten 1990; Premack and Woodruff 1978; Tomasello and Call 
1997; Whiten and Byrne 1988). Whatever the case with respect to other primates, 
it seems that we humans are supreme in our ability to lie, cheat, and deceive, 
while also maintaining outward respectability.
13. Dennett 1983.
14. Cargile 1970.
15. Dunbar 2004, 185.
16. Fifth-order recursion may be necessary for religious belief, but is surely not 
sufficient. I think I am capable of this order of recursion, but I am not religious. I 
can’t answer for Robin Dunbar.
17. Baron-Cohen 1995.
18. Grandin 1996; Grandin and Barron 2005; Grandin and Scariano 1986. 
Grandin would now be classified as a case of Asperger’s syndrome, which is a 
form of autism in which intellectual function is high.
19. Sacks 1995.
20. Grandin and Johnson 2005.
21. Senju et al. 2009.
22. Crespi and Badcock 2008.
23. Actually best known for his involvement in the antipsychiatry movement.
24. Hamilton 2005, 205. 
25. Baron-Cohen 2002.
notes to chapter 8   243

26. See Crespi and Badcock 2008 for a more detailed account.
27. See Crespi and Badcock 2008, 248, for more extensive lists. This account, 
though, is not uncontroversial, since some psychiatrists regard schizophrenia and 
autism as related, rather than as polar opposites. Both show very similar patterns 
of brain activation (Pinkham et al. 2008). One possibility is that the negative 
symptoms of schizophrenia join autism at one end of the spectrum, with positive 
symptoms of schizophrenia at the other (van Rijn, Swaab, and Aleman 2008). 
Recent evidence implicates genetic influences in both autism (no fewer than three 
papers on this appear in the 28 May 2009 issue of Nature) and schizophrenia 
(e.g., Esslinger et al. 2009), with no indication that imprinting plays a role. Even 
so, Crespi and Badcock present an interesting scenario with implications beyond 
autism and schizophrenia. 
28. Badcock and Crespi 2006.
29. Baron-Cohen 2009.
30. The reader should appreciate that the distinction between people people 
and things people is bound to be somewhat simplistic.
31. Maudsley 1873, 64.
32. Kéri 2009. The gene in question is Neuregulin 1, and the particular geno­
type is T/T. 
33. Horrobin 2003. See Richmond 2003 for a perspective on David Horrobin.
34. Farmelo 2009. In Bristol, UK, Dirac’s reputation is overshadowed by that 
of his schoolmate Archie Leach, better known later as Cary Grant.
35. Langford et al. 2006.
36. Wechkin, Masserman, and Terris 1964.
37. de Waal 2008.
38. See Povinelli, Bering, and Giambrone 2000 for a summary.
39. Tomasello, Hare, and Agnetta 1999.
40. Povinelli and Bering 2002.
41. Hare et al. 2000. Marmosets also choose food that a watching dominant 
marmoset can’t see (Burkart & Heschl, 2007).
42. Hare, Call, and Tomasello 2001.
43. Hare, Call, and Tomasello 2006.
44. Hare and Tomasello 1999.
45. The cleverness of dogs has become a matter of some contention. The ap­
parent ability of domestic dogs to read human intentions has been attributed to 
selective breeding, and may be rather more restrictive than is at first apparent. 
Dogs have been bred to collaborate with people, but they don’t seem to collabo­
rate with other dogs. For a useful discussion, see Morell 2009.
46. For a detailed critique of Hare’s studies, and of others studies claiming 
theory of mind in corvids, see Penn, Holyoak, and Povinelli 2008.
47. Whiten and Byrne 1988.
48. Leslie 1994; Tomasello and Rakoczy 2003.
49. Leslie (1994) has referred to these levels of attribution as ToMM-1 (Theory 
of Mind Module 1), involving attribution of goal-directedness and self-generated 
motion, and ToMM-2 (Theory of Mind Module 2), involving full-blown theory 
of mind. Hauser and Carey (1998) remark that “the intellectual tie breaker be­
tween humans and nonhumans is likely to lie within the power of ToMM-2.”
244   notes to chapter 8

50. Gallup 1998. 
51. For review, see Suddendorf and Collier-Baker 2009. 
52. Penn, Holyoak, and Povinelli 2008, 129.
53. No doubt having in mind, as it were, the onetime preeminence of the Rolls-
Royce automobile manufacturing company.
Chapter 9
Language and Mind
1. Fodor 1975.
2. Pinker 2007, 90.
3. For the benefit of U.S. readers, “pissed” here refers to being drunk, and not 
to being angry. It might be appropriate for newts to describe the occasionally 
drunken newt as being as pissed as a human.
4. This act has created considerable controversy and argument as to how it 
should be interpreted. It does seem to permit hunting by women. 
5. Watson 1913, 158.
6. Griffin 2001, 1.
7. Inoue and Matsuzawa 2007. The chimps first learned to recognize the digits 
1 through 9, and to point to them in succession when they were randomly dis­
played on a console. In one memory test, five digits were randomly selected and 
displayed in random positions and then blanked out and replaced with white 
squares. One chimp, Ayumu, maintained 80 percent accuracy when the duration 
of the digits was reduced to a mere fifth of a second, a performance well above 
that reached by a group of university students. 
8. Pinker 2007, 23.
9. Fauconnier 2003, 540.
10. Grice 1989, 30–31. If you’re not used to minding your philosophical Ps and 
Qs, you could take as an example P =  “Hello, John, this is a surprise. How were 
they?” and Q = This is my friend John, who must be back early from Australia, 
where he went to visit his aging parents.
11. Sperber and Wilson 2002, 15.
12. Sperber and Wilson 1986.
13. The term “minimalism” is more often used with respect to a school of mu­
sic, in which the work is stripped down to its basic features.
14. Grice 1975.
15. Language deficits can be identified in infants as young as two, and are 
manifest in poor imitation and gestural communication (Luyster et al. 2008).
16. Irony may be culturally specific, despite Kierkegaard’s claim. Tom Sudden­
dorf, a native of Germany, tells me that Germans don’t need it—and even if they 
did, they wouldn’t get it. He may have been being ironic.
17. Perhaps the only example of a double positive translating as a negative.
18. Dostoevsky 2008.
19. Gibbs 2000.
20. Papp 2006. GCSE stands for General Certificate of Secondary Education, 
a qualification sought by 12- to 14-year-old children in England, Wales, and 
notes to chapter 9   245

Northern Ireland (but not Scotland). It can be taken in several subjects, but only  
once. 
21. Happé 1995.
22. As an addict of cryptic crosswords, I often need to assume the somewhat 
autistic mentality of the compiler. One normally assumes the word number, for 
example, has to do with counting, but in crosswords it often refers to anesthetic. 
And don’t be fooled by the word flower, which can be synonymous with river. Or 
layer, which can refer to a hen.
23. Walenski et al. 2008.
24. Hauser, Chomsky, and Fitch 2002.
25. Tomasello 2008.
26. One wonders, though, why they can point at all, since for most of their evo­
lutionary existence they have not had to put up with the company of humans.
27. Tomasello 2008, 55.
28. Rivas 2005.
29. Greenfield and Savage-Rumbaugh 1990.
30. I am sharing this information with you, and don’t expect any reward. It 
would be nice, though, if you would consider buying the book, if you haven’t 
done so already.
31. The sex of the child is not stated, but I am assuming she is female. My as­
sumption is based on the fact that I have a granddaughter. This is also information 
I’d like to share with you. Note added in 2010: I now have three granddaughters. 
32. But how would you know?
33. de Villiers (2009) provides a useful discussion of the joint emergence of 
language and theory of mind, and the interface between them. 
Chapter 10
The Recurring Question
1. From Pensées 1670.
2. Walsh et al. 2003. 
3. Johnson 2000.
4. Australia is a great slab of a place to the west and somewhat to the north of 
New Zealand.
5. Sosis 2004. 
6. Bloom (2004) is not the only one to suggest that dualism is innate. See also 
Shermer’s Why People Believe Weird Things (1997), and Hood’s Why We Believe 
the Unbelievable (2009).
7. Dennett 1995.
8. Dobzhansky 1973, 125.
9. See “Shunning the E-word in Georgia,” Science, 303, 759 (2004).
10. This is not to say that all religions support the idea. Writing in the 18 
January 2005 issue of L’Osservatore Romano, the official Vatican paper, Fiorenzo 
Facchini argued that intelligent design belongs to the realms of philosophy and 
religion, but not of science. He writes that “it is not correct from a methodologi­
cal point of view to stray away from the field of science while pretending to do 
246   notes to chapter 10

science.” The Vatican has for many years tolerated the teaching of evolutionary 
theories, and in 1950 a papal encyclical officially permitted Catholics to discuss 
Darwin’s theory of evolution. In another development, on 20 December 2005 
federal district court judge John Jones III ordered the schools in Dover, Pennsyl­
vania, to remove references to intelligent design from the science curriculum, on 
the grounds that it is not science. 
11. As reported in Time magazine, 15 August 2005, 47.
12. Davis and Kenyon 2004, 99–100.
13. I am told the octopus eye is better designed, with the optic nerve located at 
the back of the retina.
14. Not everyone believes this, but few of the dissenters are willing to attribute 
the plays to an ape. The poems, maybe, but not the plays.
15. Cited by Darwin 1896, 49.
16. Quoted in Marchant 1916, 241.
17. Gross 1993.
18. A word that itself gives the game away.
19. And for insects, of course. To put it another way, they took hold of an idea 
and flew with it.
20. Chomsky 1966.
Chapter 11
Becoming Human
1. Until fairly recently, the term hominid was used, but the great apes were 
invited to join the hominid clade when it was discovered just how closely their 
genetic makeup resembled our own. See also Note 33 in chapter 2.
2. That is, if we discount the role of horses, mules, carriages, bicycles, scooters, 
automobiles, trains, ships, airplanes, and space rockets. Oh, and swimming, I sup­
pose—but you get what I mean.
3. Brunet et al. 2002.
4. Sibley and Ahlquist 1984. There is nevertheless still some uncertainty and 
conflicting evidence about the ape-hominin split. One recent theory, based on 
analysis of diversity of differences across the genome, is that the hominin and 
chimpanzee lineages split close to seven million years ago, but then hybridized, 
finally splitting again within the past 6.3 million years (Patterson et al. 2006). 
5. Galik et al. 2004.
6. Leakey 1979.
7. Thorpe, Holder, and Crompton 2007.
8. Lovejoy et al. 2009.
9. Quoted in Gibbons 2009, 39.
10. These developments may help destroy the idea that the chimp somehow 
failed to move on from common ancestry with humans some six million years 
ago, and is therefore a sort of failed human. Chimpanzee evolution simply took 
a different path.
11. Teleki 1973.
12. Bipedalism is a pain in the ass.
notes to chapter 11   247

13. Formerly known as Ayer’s Rock.
14. I am indebted to the useful discussion in chapter 12 of Michael Sims’s 2003 
book Adam’s Navel.
15. Darwin 1872, 138.
16. Quoted in Isaac 1992, 58.
17. As I write, though, it looks as though the Australian cricketers may lose the  
Ashes series against England. Note added later: They did. Note added even later 
(2006/2007): Then they lost to them again. Now (late 2010) they look like losing 
again.
18. Calvin 1983.
19. Kirschmann 1999.
20. In that game, they actually don’t seem to throw the ball, but sort of paddle 
it with the hand. But they kick the ball a lot, and kicking in this fashion, also done 
in rugby, itself requires a bipedal stance. As a New Zealander, I am tempted to 
think that pressure to kick a rugby ball was a factor in the evolution of bipedal­
ism, but to my knowledge there is no evidence for rugby pitches dating from six 
million years ago, and in any event we had to wait for the Neandertals to evolve 
before we could pack a decent scrum.
21. Bowlers in cricket, for some obscure reason, are not allowed to flex the 
elbow, and compensate by running up to the bowling crease, thereby building up 
kinetic energy, before releasing the ball. 
22. Bowling in cricket is again an exception, since fast bowlers build up speed 
before releasing the ball.
23. Marzke 1996.
24. Bronowski 1974, 115–116. Aristotle credited the Greek philosopher Anax­
agoras with the view that it is because of the hands that humans are the wisest 
animal. 
25. Young 2003. 
26. Alemseged et al. 2006.
27. Westergaard et al. 2000.
28. Darwin 1896, 82.
29. Toth et al. 1993.
30. Bingham 1999.
31. Shaw 1948, 195.
32. The vote was taken in May 2009 by a committee of the International Com­
mission on Stratigraphy (ICS)—see Kerr 2009. 
33. Wood and Collard 1999.
34. Berger et al. 2010; Dirks et al. 2010.
35. Other members of the genus have been identified, but it depends a bit where 
you draw the lines of demarcation. That little group will do for now.
36. Foley 1984.
37. Bramble and Lieberman 2004.
38. Richard William Pearse, a New Zealand famer, is said to have taken to the 
air in a heavier-than-air machine on 31 March 1903, some nine months before 
the Wright brothers. The evidence on this, though, is still up in the air. 
39. Darwin 1896, 64.
40. Hrdy 2009.
41. Another possibility would have been flight, but that was for the birds.
248   notes to chapter 11

42. Tooby and DeVore 1987. An alternative view is that the third way did not 
arrive until Mr. Tony Blair was elected Prime Minister of Great Britain.
43. Humphrey 1976.
44. Alexander 1990, 4.
45. Wrangham 2009.
46. Goren-Inbar et al. 2004.
47. Or so it is said. Perhaps it applies especially to mammals, since crocodiles 
have very small brains, as did the dinosaurs.
48. They are bipedal, they fly, they learn complex vocal sequences, they make 
tools, and, as we saw in chapter 6, it has been claimed that they travel mentally 
in time.
49. Jerison 1973. The formula is EQ = (brainweight) / (.12 × bodyweight.66). It 
is calibrated so that the EQ of the average mammal is 1.0, and the exponent of 
0.66 compensates for the tendency of brain size to increase at a slower rate than 
body weight.
50. Every decimal point counts, it seems.
51. Dunbar 1993.
52. Her remains were discovered in 1976 by Donald Johanson and colleagues 
in Ethiopia, and named after the Beatles’ song “Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds.” 
Whether Lucy had ever used LSD is unknown. See Johanson and Edey 1981.
53. These figures are from Martin 1992. 
54. Noonan et al. 2006.
55. Evans et al. 2004.
56. Mekel-Bobrov et al. 2005.
57. Evans et al. 2006.
58. For review, see Dorus et al. 2004. 
59. In case you ask, the enzyme is called CMP-N-acetylneuraminic acid (CMP-
Neu5Ac) hydroxylase (CMAH). The inactivating mutation of this gene has re­
sulted in the absence in humans of the mammalian sialic acid N-glycolylneur­
aminic acid (Neu5Gc). This work is described by Chou et al. (2002).
60. Stedman et al. 2004.
61. Currie 2004. 
62. It pains me to report that there is now some doubt as to the role of MYH16 
in the increase in brain size—see McCollom et al. 2006.
63. Pinker 1994.
64. Actually, I don’t really think it’s a good idea to be rid of taxes, which have 
supported me throughout my academic life.
65. Deacon 1997.
66. Semendeferi, Damasio, and Frank (1997) showed that the ratio of the 
frontal lobes to the rest of the brain is constant in apes and humans, while Uylings 
(1990) suggests that the ratio has changed little from rats to humans. Deacon 
(1997, 476) is critical of these studies, partly on the grounds that they do not 
measure the prefrontal cortex independently of motor and premotor areas. A 
more recent study suggests that the volume of white matter in the prefrontal 
cortex is disproportionately large in humans relative to other primates, but the 
volume of grey matter is not (Schoenemann, Sheehan, and Glotzer 2005). Maybe 
white matter is what matters.
67. Flinn, Geary, and Ward 2005.
notes to chapter 11   249

68. Dr. Darwin, that is.
69. Locke and Bogin 2006.
70. Locke and Bogin 2006, 262.
71. Busby Grant and Suddendorf 2009.
72. This is not to say that humans don’t migrate seasonally. Wealthy Canadians 
migrate to Florida or Hawaii during the winter, and New Zealanders fly off to 
Queensland in Australia.
73. Anton 2002. One delightful exception is the hobbit-like hominin known 
as the Lady of Flora—or more formally as Homo floresiensis—whose skeleton 
remains were discovered on the island of Flora in Southeast Asia (Brown et al. 
2004). She appears to date from a mere 18,000 years ago, which is by far the 
most recent date for any hominin who does not belong to our own species, Homo 
sapiens. An adult, she was only about one meter tall, with a brain volume of only 
about 380 cc, which is rather smaller than that of a modern chimpanzee. Her 
encephalization quotient (EQ) was nevertheless within the range 2.5–4.6, which 
compares with that of Homo erectus at between 3.3 and 4.4. The current consen­
sus seems to be that she belonged indeed to the species Homo erectus (e.g., Falk 
et al. 2005), but had been subjected to what is known as “insular dwarfism” arising  
from long-term isolation and limited resources. As a New Zealander, I worry that 
the same thing might occur on our own islands and affect our rugby team—hob­
bits have already been detected in some areas. 
74. Dennell and Roebroeks 2005.
75. Bogart and Pruetz 2008.
76. Pruetz and Bertolani 2007.
77. Boesch, Head, and Robbins 2009. The tools are identified as pounders, 
enlargers, collectors, perforators, and swabbers. They are mindful of the tools 
used in modern surgery.
78. Carvalho et al. 2009.
79. Sousa, Biro, and Matsuzawa 2009.
80. Beck 1980, 218.
81. Semaw et al. 1997. 
82. Chazan et al. 2008.
83. Hunt 2000. These birds also shape twigs to act as hooks (Weir, Chappell, 
and Kacelnik 2002).
84. Walter et al. 2000. 
85. Hoffecker 2007.
86. Noonan et al. 2006.
87. No one seems to have suggested that the horses made the spears. 
88. Thieme 1997.
Chapter 12
Becoming Modern
1. As remarked in note 72 in chapter 4, it has become fairly apparent that 
Homo sapiens mated with the Neandertals some time after the migration from 
Africa, but before the Asian and European populations split—some 50,000 to 
250   notes to chapter 12

80,000 years ago. The estimated gene flow from Neandertal to non-African H. 
sapiens is estimated at between 1 and 4 percent (Green et al. 2010). 
2. Atkinson, Gray, and Drummond 2009. Four other haplotypes have also been 
identified but these are rare.
3. Cann, Stoneking, and Wilson 1987. Tracing mtDNA back to a single woman 
does not mean that Mitochondrial Eve was the only woman alive at the time. 
4. Atkinson, Gray, and Drummond 2008.
5. Mellars 2006a.
6. Brown et al. 2009. These authors suggest that the technological use of fire at 
Pinnacle Point in South Africa may go back as far as 164,000 years ago.
7. Goren-Inbar et al. 2004.
8. Henshilwood et al. 2002.
9. Mellars 2006b. 
10. Carto et al. 2009. 
11. Bowler et al. 2003.
12. Marean et al. 2007.
13. Mellars 2006a.
14. Crow 2010—see note 10 in chapter 4.
15. Hoffecker 2005, 195; emphasis added.
16. Crystal 1997.
17. Knight et al. 2003. 
18. I suggested this in my 2002 book From Hand to Mouth, but that was be­
fore I knew about the FOXP2 gene.
19. Especially the Italians.
20. Corballis 2004b.
21. Conard, Malina, and Münzel 2009.
22. Kvavadze et al. 2009.
23. Hoffecker 2005.
24. Conard 2009. 
25. Mellars 2009, 177. He doesn’t divulge the student’s sex.
26. Mellars 2005.
27. Darwin 1896, 64.
28. Mellars and Stringer 1989.
29. Klein 2008. Again, of course, a candidate mutation is that of the FOXP2 
gene. As we saw in chapter 4, one recent estimate places this mutation at closer 
to 50,000 years ago than 100,000 years ago (Coop et al. 2008). Nevertheless this 
remains contentious, especially following evidence that the mutation may have been 
present in the common ancestor of human and Neandertal (Krause et al. 2007).
30. Powell, Shennan, and Thomas 2009. The estimated date of 45,000 years 
ago places this very early in the estimated date of migration into Europe, but 
there still seems to be some uncertainty in the dating of these events.
31. Ambrose 1998. 
32. New Zealand is sometimes known as the shaky isles, especially in Australia, 
and an eruption of Lake Taupo in about AD 280 caused the sky to glow red as 
far away as Russia and China. It is said to have erupted some 28 times since the 
original huge eruption around 26,500 years ago, and it could pop again at any  
time.
notes to chapter 12   251

33. Arthur 2007, 277.
34. Letter to Robert Hooke, dated 15 February 1676.
35. Although cultural variation is now well documented in chimpanzees, Whiten  
et al. (2009) suggest that, unlike human culture, chimpanzee culture is not cumu­
lative. The ratchet-like nature of human culture allows it to cumulate over gen­
erations. This is perhaps another example of recursion, in which past cultural 
development is embedded in present culture.
36. Diamond 1997, 14. For “cargo” you can mostly read “junk”—stuff you 
don’t really need. 
Chapter 13
Final Thoughts
1. Chapter 13 is entitled “Secondary Sexual Characters of Birds.”
2. Darwin 1896, 126. It is interesting that this passage begins with reference to 
higher animals and ends with reference to lower ones. 
3. Arnold 1992.
4. E.g., Ambrose 2001.
5. There may nevertheless be cultural variation. The Pirahã, discussed in chap­
ters 6 and 7, appear to have a relatively reduced language and sense of time, but 
may compensate in other ways. There is little question, moreover, that all humans 
possess the capacity for unlimited expression, but cultures vary to the manner in 
which that capacity is exploited.
6. Arthur 2007.
7. Dunbar 2004.
8. Me, I am scarcely able to even screw in a lightbulb.
9. Wiles 1995; Taylor and Wiles 1995. There remains the remote possibility 
that Fermat had a much simpler proof all along. 
10. Hamilton 2005.
11. Beyerstein 1999.
12. My mother did try. She took me skiing at the age of 16 (my age, not hers), 
but conditions were fairly primitive, and after struggling some distance up the 
mountain I accidently released one ski, which sped all the way down again. I 
suppose if I had persevered with the remaining ski I might have invented snow­
boarding.
252   notes to chapter 13

References
Addis, D. R., Wong, A. T. and Schacter, D. L. 2007. Remembering the past and 
imagining the future: Common and distinct neural substrates during event 
construction. Neuropsychologia, 45, 1363–1377.
Aitken, P. G. 1981. Cortical control of conditioned and spontaneous vocal be-
haviour in rhesus monkeys. Brain and Language, 13, 171–184.
Alemseged, Z., Spoor, F., Kimbel, W. H., Bobe, R., Geraads, D., Reed, D., et al. 
2006. A juvenile early hominin skeleton from Dikika, Ethiopia. Nature, 443, 
296–301.
Alexander, R. D. 1990. How did humans evolve? Reflections on the uniquely 
unique species. Ann Arbor: Museum of Zoology, University of Michigan.
Ambrose, S. H. 1998. Late Pleistocene human population bottlenecks, volcanic 
winter, and the differentiation of modern humans. Journal of Human Evolu-
tion, 34, 623–651.
———. 2001. Paleolithic technology and human evolution. Science, 291, 
1748–1753.
Andrews, P., and Stringer, C. 1993. The primates’ progress. In S. J. Gould (ed.), 
The book of life (pp. 219–251). London: Norton.
Anton, S. C. 2002. Evolutionary significance of cranial variation in Asian Homo 
erectus. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 118, 310–323.
Arbib, M. A. 2005. From monkey-like action recognition to human language: 
An evolutionary framework for neurolinguistics. Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences, 28, 105–168.
———. 2009. Invention and community in the emergence of language: A per-
spective from new sign languages. In S. M. Platek and T. K. Shackelford (eds.),  
Foundations in cognitive neuroscience: Introduction to the discipline (pp. 117– 
152). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
———. 2010. Mirror system activity for action and language is embedded in 
	 the integration of dorsal and ventral pathways. Brain and Language, 11, 12–24.
Arbib, M. A., Liebal, K., and Pika, S. 2008. Primate vocalization, gesture, and 
the evolution of human language. Current Anthropology, 49, 1053–1076. 
Arbib, M. A., and Rizzolatti, G. 1997. Neural expectations: A possible evolu-
tionary path from manual skill to language. Communication and Cognition, 
29, 393–424.
Arcadi, A. C. 2000. Vocal responsiveness in male wild chimpanzees: Impli-
cations for the evolution of language. Journal of Human Evolution, 39, 
205–223.
Arcadi, A. C., Robert, D., and Boesch, C. 1998. Buttress drumming by wild 
chimpanzees: Temporal patterning, phase integration into loud calls, and 
preliminary evidence for individual differences. Primates, 39, 505–518.

254   references
Armstrong, D. F. 1999. Original signs: Gesture, sign, and the source of language. 
Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.
Armstrong, D. F., Stokoe, W. C., and Wilcox, S. E. 1995. Gesture and the nature 
of language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Armstrong, D. F., and Wilcox, S. E. 2007. The gestural origin of language. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press.
Arnold, V. I. 1992. Catastrophe theory. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Aronoff, M. 2007. In the beginning was the word. Language, 83, 803–830.
Aronoff, M., Meir, I., Padden, C. A., and Sandler, W. 2008. The roots of linguis-
tic organization in a new language. Interaction Studies, 9, 133–153. 
Arthur, W. B. 2007. The structure of invention. Research Policy, 36, 274–287.
Aslin, R. N., Werker, J. F., and Morgan, J. L. 2002. Innate phonetic boundaries 
revisited (L). Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 112, 1258–1260.
Atance, C. M., and O’Neill, D. K. 2005. The emergence of episodic future think-
ing in humans. Learning and Motivation, 36, 126–144.
Atkinson, Q. D., Gray, R. D., and Drummond, A. J. 2008. MtDNA variation 
predicts population size in humans and reveals a major southern Asian chap-
ter in human prehistory. Molecular Biological Evolution, 25, 468–474.
———. 2009. Bayesian coalescent inference of major human mitochondrial 
DNA haplogroup expansions in Africa. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 276, 367–373.
Austen, J. 1813. Pride and prejudice. London: T. Egerton.
Aziz-Zadeh, L., Wilson, S. M., Rizzolatti, G., and Iacoboni, M. 2006. Congruent 
embodied representations for visually presented actions and linguistic phrases 
describing actions. Current Biology, 16, 1818–1823.
Badcock, C., and Crespi, B. 2006. Imbalanced genomic imprinting in brain 
development: An evolutionary basis for the aetiology of autism. Journal of 
Evolutionary Biology, 19, 1007–1032.
Bahlmann, J., Gunter, T. C., and Friederici, A. D. 2006. Hierarchical and linear 
sequence processing: An electrophysiological exploration of two different 
grammar types. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 1829–1842. 
Barkow, J. H., Cosmides, L., and Tooby, J. (eds.) 1992. The adapted mind: Evo-
lutionary psychology and the generation of culture. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press. 
Baron-Cohen, S. 1995. Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind. 
Cambridge: A Bradford Book / MIT Press.
———. 2002. The extreme male brain theory of autism. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 6, 248–254.
———. 2009. Autism: The empathizing-systematizing (E-S) theory. In M. B.  
Miller and A. Kingstone (eds.), The year in cognitive science 2009 (pp. 68– 
80). Boston: Blackwell.
Barth, J. 1969. Lost in the funhouse. London: Secker and Warburg.
Bartlett, F. C. 1932. Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychol-
ogy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

references   255
Bass, E., and Davis L. 1988. The courage to heal: A guide for women survivors 
of child sexual abuse. New York: Perennial Library. 
Beck, B. B. 1980. Animal tool behavior: The use and manufacture of tools by 
animals. New York: Garland STPM Press.
Berger, L. R., de Ruiter, D. J., Churchill, S. E., Schmid, P. Carlson, K. J., Dirks, 
P.H.G.M., et al. 2010. Australopithecus sediba: A new species of Homo-like 
australopith from South Africa. Science, 328, 195–204.
Bernard, L. L. 1924. Instinct: A study in social psychology. New York: Henry 
Holt.
Bernardis, P., Bello, A., Pettenati, P., Stefanini, S., and Gentilucci, M. 2008. 
Manual actions affect vocalizations of infants. Experimental Brain Research, 
184, 599–603.
Bernheim, H. 1989. Suggestive therapeutics: A treatise on the nature and uses of 
hypnotism. New York: Putnam.
Beyerstein, B. L. 1999. Whence cometh the myth that we only use 10% of our 
brains. In S. Della Sala (ed.), Mind myths (pp. 3–24). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Bickerton, D. 1995. Language and human behavior. Seattle: University of Wash-
ington Press.
———. 2010. On two incompatible theories of language evolution. In R. K. 
Larson, V. Déprez, and H. Yamakido (eds.), The evolution of human language 
(pp. 199–210). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bingham, P. M. 1999. Human uniqueness: A general theory. Quarterly Review 
of Biology, 74, 133–169.
Binkofski, F., and Buccino, G. 2004. Motor functions of the Broca’s region. 
Brain and Language, 89, 362–389.
Bischof, N. 1978. On the phylogeny of human morality. In G. S. Stent (ed.), 
Morality as biological phenomenon (pp. 53–74). Berlin: Dahlem Konferenzen. 
Bischof-Köhler, D. 1985. Zur Phylogenese menschlicher Motivation [On the 
phylogeny of human motivation]. In L. H. Eckensberger and E. D. Lan-
termann (eds.), Emotion und Reflexivität (pp. 3–47). Vienna: Urban and 
Schwarzenberg.
Blatt, F. 1957. Latin influences on European syntax. Travaux du Cercle Linguis-
tique de Copenhague, 11, 33–69.
Bloom, P. 2004. Descartes’ baby: How the science of child development explains 
what makes us human. New York: Basic Books.
Boë, L.-J., Heim, J.-L., Honda, K., Maeda, S., Badin, P., and Abry, C. 2007. The 
vocal tract of newborn humans and Neanderthals: Acoustic capabilities and 
consequences for the debate on the origin of language. A reply to Lieberman 
(2007a). Journal of Phonetics, 35, 564–581.
Boë, L.-J., Honda, J.-L., Honda, K., and Maeda, S. 2002. The potential Nean-
dertal vowel space was as large as that of modern humans. Journal of Phonet-
ics, 30, 465–484.
Boesch, C., and Boesch, H. 1990. Tool use and tool making in wild chimpan-
zees. Folia Primatologica, 54, 86–99.

256   references
Boesch, C., Head, J., and Robbins, M. M. 2009. Complex tool sets for honey 
extraction among chimpanzees in Laongo National Park, Gabon. Journal of 
Human Evolution, 56, 560–569.
Bogart, S. L., and Pruetz, J. D. 2008. Ecological context of savanna chimpanzee 
(Pan troglodyte verus) termite fishing at Fongoli, Senegal. American Journal  
of Primatology, 70, 605–612.
Borke, H. 1975. Piaget’s mountains revisited: Changes in the egocentric land-
scape. Developmental Psychology, 11, 240–243.
Botzung, A., Denkova, E., and Manning, L. 2008. Experiencing past and future 
personal events: Functional neuroimaging evidence on the neural basis of 
mental time travel. Brain and Cognition, 66, 202–212. 
Bowler, J. M., Johnston, H., Olley, J. M., Prescott, J. R., Roberts, R. G., Shaw-
cross, W., et al. 2003. New ages for human occupation and climate change at 
Lake Mungo, Australia. Nature, 421, 837–840.
Boyd, B. 2009. The origin of stories: Evolution, cognition, and fiction. Cam-
bridge: Belnap Press of Harvard University Press.
Bramble, D. M., and Lieberman, D. E. 2004. Endurance running and the evolu-
tion of Homo. Science, 432, 345–352.
Bronowski, J. 1974. The ascent of man. Boston: Little, Brown.
Browman, C. P., and Goldstein, L. F. 1995. Dynamics and articulatory phonol-
ogy. In T. van Gelder and R. F. Port (eds.), Mind as motion (pp. 175–193). 
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Brown, K. S., Marean, C. W., Herries, A. L. R., Jacobs, Z., Tribolo, C., Braun, D., 
et al. 2009. Fire as an engineering tool of early modern humans. Science, 325, 
859–862.
Brown, P., Sutikna, T., Morwood, M. J., Soejono, R. P., Jatmiko, W. S., et al. 
2004. A new small-bodied hominin from the late Pleistocene of Flores, Indo-
nesia. Nature, 431, 1055–1061.
Bruce, D., Dolan, A., and Phillips-Grant, K. 2000. On the transition from child-
hood amnesia to the recall of personal memories. Psychological Science, 11, 
360–364.
Brunet, M., Guy, F., Pilbeam, D., Mackaye, H. T., Likius, A., Ahounta, D., 
Beauvilain, A., et al. 2002. A new hominid from the Upper Miocene of Chad, 
Central Africa. Nature, 418, 145–151.
Burianova, H. and Grady, C. L. 2007. Common and unique activations in au-
tobiographical, episodic, and semantic retrieval. Journal of Cognitive Neuro-
science, 19, 1520–1534.
Burkart, J. M., and Heschl, A. 2007. Perspective taking or behaviour reading? 
Understanding of visual access in common marmosets (Calithrix jacchus). 
Animal Behaviour, 73, 457–469.
Burling, R. 1999. Motivation, conventionalization, and arbitrariness in the 
origin of language. In B. J. King (ed.), The origins of language: What hu-
man primates can tell us (pp. 307–350). Santa Fe, NM: School of American 
Research Press.

references   257
———. 2005. The talking ape. New York: Oxford University Press.
Burnham, W. H. 1989. Memory, historically and experimentally considered: III. 
Paramnesia. American Journal of Psychology, 2, 568–622. 
Busby Grant, J., and Suddendorf, T. 2009. Preschoolers begin to differentiate the 
times of events from throughout the lifespan. European Journal of Develop-
mental Psychology, 6, 746–762.
Butler, S. 1919. On the making of music, pictures and books. In H. F. Jones (ed.), 
The note-books of Samuel Butler (pp. 93–99). London: A.C. Fifield.
Butterfield, H. 1981. The origins of history. New York: Basic Books.
Byrne, R. W., and Whiten, A. 1990. Tactical deception in primates: The 1990 
data base. Primate Report, 27, 1–10.
Calvert, G. A., and Campbell, R. 2003. Reading speech from still and moving 
faces: The neural substrates of visible speech. Journal of Cognitive Neurosci-
ence, 15, 57–70.
Calvin, W. H. 1983. The throwing Madonna: Essays on the brain. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Calvin, W. H., and Bickerton, D. 2000. Lingua ex machina: Reconciling Darwin 
and Chomsky with the human brain. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cann, R. L., Stoneking, M., and Wilson, A. C. 1987. Mitochondrial DNA and 
human evolution. Nature, 325, 31–36.
Cargile, J. 1970. A note on “iterated knowings.” Analysis, 30, 151–155.
Carreiras, M., Lopez, J., Rivero, F., and Corina, D. 2005. Neural processing of a 
whistled language. Nature, 433, 31–32.
Carto, S. L., Weaver, A. J., Heatherington, R., Lam, Y., and Wiebe, E. C. 2009. 
Out of Africa and into an ice age: On the role of global climate change in the 
late Pleistocene migration of early modern humans out of Africa. Journal of 
Human Evolution, 56, 139–151.
Carvalho, S., Biro, D., McGrew, W. C., and Matsuzawa, T. 2009. Tool-composite  
reuse in wild chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes): Archaeologically invisible steps 
in the technological evolution of early hominins? Animal Cognition, 12 
(Suppl. 1), 103.
Chase, S. 1938. Tyranny of words. London: Methuen. 
Chazan, M., Ron, H., Matmon, A., Porat, N., Goldberg, P., Yates, R., et al. 
2008. Radiometric dating of the earlier Stone Age sequence in Excavation I 
at Wonderwerk Cave, South Africa: Preliminary results. Journal of Human 
Evolution, 55, 1–11.
Chen, J.-Y. 2007. Do Chinese and English speakers think about time differently? 
Failure of replicating Boroditsky 2001. Cognition, 104, 427–436.
Cheney, D. L., and Seyfarth, R. S. 1990. How monkeys see the world. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Chomsky, N. 1957. Syntactic structures. The Hague: Mouton.
———. 1959. A review of Skinner’s “Verbal Behavior.” Language, 35, 26–58.
———. 1966. Cartesian linguistics: A chapter in the history of rationalist 
thought. New York: Harper and Row.

258   references
———. 1970. New horizons in the study of language and mind. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
———. 1975. Reflections on language. New York: Pantheon.
———. 1988 Language and the problem of knowledge: The Managua lectures.  
Cambridge: MIT Press.
———. 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge: MIT Press.
———. 2010. Some simple evo devo theses: How true might they be for lan-
guage? In R. K. Larson, V. Déprez, and H. Yamakido, The evolution of human 
language (pp. 45–62). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chou, H.-H., Hakayama, T., Diaz, S., Krings, M., Indriati, E., Leakey, M., et al. 
2002. Inactivation of CMP-N-acetylneuraminic acid hydroxylase occurred 
prior to brain expansion during human evolution. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences (USA), 99, 11736–11741.
Christiansen, M. H., and Chater, N. 2008. Language as shaped by the brain. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31, 489–558.
Christiansen, M. H., and Kirby, S. 2003. Language evolution: The hardest prob-
lem in science? In M. H. Christiansen and S. Kirby (eds.), Language evolution 
(pp. 1–15). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clayton, N. S., Bussey, T. J., and Dickinson, A. 2003. Can animals recall the past 
and plan for the future? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4, 685–691.
Conard, N. J. 2009. A female figurine from the basal Aurignacian of Hohle Fels 
Cave in southwestern Germany. Nature, 459, 248–252.
Conard, N. J., Malina, M., and Münzel, S. C. 2009. New flutes document the 
earliest musical tradition in southwestern Germany. Nature, 460, 737–740.
Condillac, E. Bonnot de 1971. An essay on the origin of human knowledge: 
Being a supplement to Mr. Locke’s Essay on the human understanding. A fac-
simile reproduction of the 1756 translation by T. Nugent of Condillac’s 1747 
essay. Gainesville, FL: Scholars’ Facsimiles and Reprints.
Coop, G., Bullaughev, K., Luca, F., and Przeworski, M. 2008. The timing of 
selection of the human FOXP2 gene. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 25, 
1257–1259.
Corballis, M. C. 1991. The lopsided ape. New York: Oxford University Press.
———. 2002. From hand to mouth: The origins of language. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
———. 2004a. FOXP2 and the mirror system. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
8(2), 95–96.
———. 2004b. The origins of modernity: Was autonomous speech the critical 
factor? Psychological Review, 111, 543–552.
———. 2007a. On phrase-structure and brain responses: A comment on Bahl-
mann, Gunter, and Friederici 2006. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 19, 
1581–1583.
———. 2007b. Recursion, language, and starlings. Cognitive Science, 31, 
697–704.

references   259
Corballis, M. C., and Suddendorf, T.  2007. Memory, time, and language. In 
C. Pasternak (ed.), What makes us human (pp. 17–36).  Oxford: Oneworld 
Publications.
Corkin, S. 2002. What’s new with the amnesic patient H.M.? Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 3, 153–160.
Correia, S. P. C., Dickinson, A., and Clayton, N. S. 2007. Western scrub-jays 
anticipate future needs independently of their current motivational state. Cur-
rent Biology, 17, 856–861.
Cosmides, L. 1985. The logic of social exchange: Has natural selection shaped 
how humans reason? Studies with the Wason selection task. Cognition, 31, 
187–276.
Cosmides, L., and Tooby, J. 1992. Cognitive adaptations for social exchange. In 
J. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby (eds.), The adapted mind: Evolutionary 
psychology and the generation of culture (pp. 163–228). New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Cox, N. 2004. Tarzan Presley. Wellington, New Zealand: Victoria University Press.
Crespi, B., and Badcock, C. 2008. Psychosis and autism as diametrical disorders 
of the human brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31, 241–320.
Critchley, M. 1939. The language of gesture. London: Arnold.
———. 1975. Silent language. London: Arnold.
Crow, T. J. 2010. A theory of the origin of cerebral asymmetry: Epigenetic varia-
tion superimposed on a fixed right-shift. Laterality, 15, 289–303.
Crystal, D. 1997. The Cambridge encyclopedia of language. 2nd edition. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Culotta, E. 2007. Ancient DNA reveals Neandertals with red hair, fair complex-
ions. Science, 318, 546–547. 
Currie, P. 2004. Muscling in on hominid evolution. Nature, 428, 373–374.
Dally, J. M., Emery, N. J., and Clayton, N. S. 2006. Food-caching western scrub-
jays keep track of who was watching when. Science, 312, 1662–1666.
D’Argembeau, A., Xue, G., Lu, Z. L., Van der Linden, M., and Bechara, A. 2008. 
Neural correlates of envisioning emotional events in the near and far future. 
NeuroImage, 40, 398–407.
Darwin, C. 1859. On the origin of species by means of natural selection. Lon-
don: John Murray.
———. 1872. The expression of the emotions in man and animals. London: 
John Murray.
———. 1896. The descent of man and selection in relation to sex. 2nd edition. 
1st edition published 1871. New York: Appleton.
Davis, P., and Kenyon, D. 2004. Of pandas and people. Richardson, TX: Foun-
dation for Thought and Ethics.
Dawkins, R., and Krebs, J. R. 1978. Animal signals: Information or manipula-
tion? In J. R. Krebs and N. B. Davies (eds.), Behavioral ecology: An evolution-
ary approach (pp. 283–309). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.

260   references
Deacon, T. 1997. The symbolic species. New York: Norton.
de Boer, B., and Fitch, W. T. 2010. Computer models of vocal tract evolution: 
An overview and critique. Adaptive Behavior, 18, 36–47.
DeGusta, D., Gilbert, W. H., and Turner, S. P. 1999. Hypoglossal canal size 
and hominid speech. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 96, 
1800–1804. 
Dennell, R., and Roebroeks, W. 2005. An Asian perspective on early human 
dispersal from Africa. Nature, 438, 1099–1104.
Dennett, D. C. 1983. Intentional systems in cognitive ethology: The “Pangloss­
ian paradigm” defended. Behavioral and Brain Science, 6, 343–390.
———. 1995. Darwin’s dangerous idea: Evolution and the meaning of life. New 
York: Simon and Schuster.
de Villiers, J. 2007. The interface of language and theory of mind. Lingua, 117, 
1858–1878.
de Waal, F.B.M. 1982. Chimpanzee politics: Power and sex among apes. Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins Press. 
———. 2008. Putting the altruism back into altruism: The evolution of empa-
thy. Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 279–300.
Diamond, J. 1997. Guns, germs, and steel: The fates of human societies. New 
York: Norton. 
Dick, F., Bates, E., Wulfeck, B., Utman, J. A., Dronkers, N. F., and Gernsbacher, 
M. A. 2001. Language deficits, localization, and grammar: Evidence for a dis-
tributed model of language breakdown in aphasic patients and neurologically 
intact individuals. Psychological Review, 108, 759–788.
Dirks, P. H. G., Kibii, J. M., Kuhn, B. F., Steininger, C., Churchill, S. E., Kramers, 
J. D., et al. 2010. Geological setting and age of Australopithecus sediba from 
southern Africa. Science, 328, 205–208.
Dobzhansky, T. 1973. Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of 
evolution. American Biology Teacher, 35, 125–129.
Donald, M. 1991. Origins of the modern mind. Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press. 
Dorus, S., Vallender, E. J., Evans, P. D., Anderson, J. R., Gilbert, S. L., Mahow-
ald, M., et al. 2004. Accelerated evolution of nervous system genes in the 
origin of Homo sapiens. Cell, 119, 1027–1040.
Dostoevsky, F. 2008. Notes from underground. New York: Classic House (origi-
nally published 1864).
Dunbar, R.I.M. 1993. Coevolution of neocortical size, group size, and language 
in humans. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 681–735.
———. 2004. The human story: A new history of mankind’s evolution. London: 
Faber and Faber.
Eckstein, G. 1948. Everyday miracle. New York: Harper and Row.
———. 1970. The body has a head. New York: Harper and Row.

references   261
Emmorey, K. 2002. Language, cognition, and brain: Insights from sign language 
research. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Enard, W., Gehre, S., Hammerschmidt, K., Halter, S. M., Blass, T., Somel, M.,  
et al. 2009. A humanized version of Foxp2 affects cortico-basal ganglia cir-
cuits in mice. Cell, 137, 961–971.
Enard, W., Przeworski, M., Fisher, S. E., Lai, C.S.L., Wiebe, V., Kitano, T., et al. 
2002. Molecular evolution of FOXP2, a gene involved in speech and lan-
guage. Nature, 418, 869–871.
Esslinger, C., Walter, H., Kirsch, P., Erk, S., Schnell, K., Arnold, C., et al. 2009. 
Neural mechanisms of a genome-wide supported psychosis variant. Science, 
324, 605.
Evans, N. 2003. Bininj Gun-wok: A pan-dialectical grammar of Mayali, Kun-
winjku and Kune. Canberra, Australia: Pacific Linguistics.
———. 2009. Dying words: Endangered languages and what they have to tell 
us. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Evans, N., and Levinson, S. C. 2009. The myth of language universals: Lan-
guage diversity and its importance for cognitive science. Behavioral & Brain 
Sciences, 32, 429–492. 
Evans, P. D., Anderson, J. R., Vallender, E. J., Gilbert, S. L., Malcom, C. M., 
Dorus, S., et al. 2004. Adaptive evolution of ASPM, a major determinant of 
cerebral cortical size in humans. Human Molecular Genetics, 13, 489–494.
Evans, P. D., Mekel-Bobrov, N., Yallender, E. J., Hudson, R. R., and Lahn, B. T. 
2006. Evidence that the adaptive allele of the brain size gene microcephalin 
introgressed into Homo sapiens from an archaic Homo lineage. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 103, 18178–18183.
Everett, D. L. 2005. Cultural constraints on grammar and cognition in Pirahã. 
Current Anthropology, 46, 621–646.
———. 2007. Cultural constraints on grammar in Pirahã: A reply to Nevins, 
Pesetsky, and Rodrigues (2007). Online at http://ling.auf.net/lingBuzz/000427.
———. 2008. Don’t sleep, there are snakes. New York: Pantheon.
Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Pavesi, G., and Rizzolatti, G. 1995. Motor facilitation 
during action observation: A magnetic stimulation study. Journal of Neuro-
physiology, 73, 2608–2611.
Falk, D., Hildebolt, C., Smith, K., Morwood, M. J., Sutkina, T., Brown, P., et al. 
2005. The brain of LB1, Homo floresiensis. Science, 308, 242–245.
Farmelo, G. 2009. The strangest man: The hidden life of Paul Dirac. London: 
Faber and Faber.
Fauconnier, G. 2003. Cognitive linguistics. In L. Nadel (ed.), Encyclopedia of 
cognitive science, vol. 1 (pp. 539–543). London: Nature Publishing Group.
Ferkin, M. H., Combs, A., delBarco-Trillo, J., Pierce, A. A., and Franklin, S. 2008. 
Meadow voles, Microtus pennsylvanicus, have the capacity to recall the “what”, 
“where”, and “when” of a single past event. Animal Cognition, 11, 147–159.

262   references
Fisher, S. E., and Scharff, C. 2009. FOXP2 as a molecular window into speech 
and language. Trends in Genetics, 25, 166–177.
Fisher, S. E., Vargha-Khadem, F., Watkins, K. E., Monaco, A. P., and Pembrey, 
M. E. 1998. Localisation of a gene implicated in a severe speech and language 
disorder. Nature Genetics, 18, 168–170.
Fitch, W. T. 2010a. The evolution of language. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
———. 2010b. Three meanings of “recursion”: Key distinctions for biolinguis-
tics. In R. K. Larson, V. Déprez, and H. Yamakido (eds.), The evolution of 
human language (pp. 73–90). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fitch, W. T., and Hauser, M. D. 2004. Computational constraints on syntactic 
processing in a nonhuman primate. Science, 303, 377–380.
Flinn, M. V., Geary, D. C., and Ward, C. V. 2005. Ecological dominance, social 
competition, and the coalitionary arms race: Why humans evolved extraordi-
nary intelligence. Evolution and Human Behavior, 26, 10–46.
Fodor, J. A. 1975. The language of thought. New York: Crowell.
———. 1983. The modularity of mind. Cambridge: Bradford Books, MIT Press.
———. 2000. The mind doesn’t work that way. Cambridge: Bradford Books, 
MIT Press.
Foley, R. 1984. Early man and the Red Queen: Tropical African community 
evolution and hominid adaptation. In R. Foley (ed.), Hominid evolution and 
community ecology: Prehistoric human adaptation in biological perspective 
(pp. 85–110). London: Academic Press.
Forster, M. 1995. Hidden lives. New York: Viking.
Frege, G. 1980. Letter to Jourdain. In G. Gabriel, H. Hermes, F. Kambartel,  
C. Thiel, and A. Veraart (eds.), Philosophical and mathematical correspondence  
(pp. 78–80). Chicago: University of Chicago Press (originally published 1914).
Friederici, A. D., Bahlmann, J., Heim, S., Schubotz, R. I., and Anwander, A. 
2006. The brain differentiates human and non-human grammars: Functional 
localization and structural connectivity. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 103, 2458–2463.
Frishberg, N. 1975. Arbitrariness and iconicity in American Sign Language. 
Language, 51, 696–719.
Galik, K., Senut, B., Pickford, M., Gommery, D., Treil, J., Kuperavage, A. J., et 
al. 2004. External and internal morphology of the BAR 1002’00 Orrorin 
tugenensis femur. Science, 305, 1450–1453.
Gallup, G. G., Jr. 1998. Self-awareness and the evolution of social intelligence. 
Behavioural Processes, 42, 239–247.
Gardner, R. A., and Gardner, B. T. 1969. Teaching sign language to a chimpan-
zee. Science, 165, 664–672.
Gentilucci, M., Benuzzi, F., Gangitano, M., and Grimaldi, S. 2001. Grasp with 
hand and mouth: A kinematic study on healthy subjects. Journal of Neuro-
physiology, 86, 1685–1699.

references   263
Gentilucci, M., and Corballis, M. C. 2006. From manual gesture to speech: A 
gradual transition. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 30, 949–960.
Gentner, T. Q., Fenn, K. M., Margoliash, D., and Nusbaum, H. C. 2006. Recur-
sive syntactic pattern learning by songbirds. Nature, 440, 1204–1207.
Gibbons, A. 2009. A new kind of ancestor: Ardipithecus unveiled. Science, 326, 
36–40.
Gibbs, R. W. 2000. Irony in talk among friends. Metaphor and Symbol, 15, 
5–27.
Givòn, T. 1971. Historical syntax and synchronic morphology: An archaeolo-
gist’s field trip. CLS#7, University of Chicago, Chicago Linguistics Society.
Goldin-Meadow, S., and McNeill, D. 1999. The role of gesture and mimetic 
representation in making language the province of speech. In M. C. Corballis 
and S. E. G. Lea (eds.), The descent of mind (pp. 155–172). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Goodall, J. 1986. The chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of behavior. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press.
Goren-Inbar, N., Alperson, N., Kislev, M. E., Simchoni, O., Melamed, Y., Ben-
Nun, A., et al. 2004. Evidence for hominin control of fire at Gesher Benot, 
Ya’aqov, Israel. Science, 304, 725–727.
Grandin, T. 1996. Thinking in pictures. New York: Vintage.
Grandin, T., and Barron, S. 2005. The unwritten rules of social relationships. 
Arlington, TX: Future Horizons.
Grandin, T., and Johnson, C. 2005. Animals in translation: Using the mysteries 
of autism to decode animal behavior. New York: Scribner.
Grandin, T., and Scariano, M. M. 1986. Emergence, labeled autistic. Norato, 
CA: Arena Press.
Green, R. E., Krause, J., Briggs, A. W., Maricic, T., Stenzel, U., Kircher, M., et al. 
2010. A draft sequence of the Neandertal genome. Science, 328, 710–722.
Greenfield, S., and Savage-Rumbaugh, E. S. 1990. Grammatical combination 
in Pan paniscus: Processes of learning and invention in the evolution and 
development of language. In S. T. Parker and K. R. Gibson (eds.), “Language” 
and intelligence in monkeys and apes (pp. 540–578). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Grice, H. P. 1975. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and J. Morgan (eds.), Syntax 
and semantics, vol. 3, Speech acts (pp. 43–58). New York: Academic Press.
———. 1989. Studies in the way of words. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Griffin, D. R. 2001. Animal minds: Beyond cognition to consciousness. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Grodzinsky, Y. 2006. The language faculty, Broca’s region, and the mirror sys-
tem. Cortex, 42, 464–468. 
Gross, C. G. 1993. Huxley versus Owen: The hippocampus minor and evolu-
tion. Trends in Neurosciences, 16, 493–498.
Groszer, M., Keays, D. A., Deacon, R.M.J., de Bono, J. P., Prasad-Mulcare, S., 

264   references
Gaube, S., et al. 2008. Impaired synaptic plasticity and motor learning in mice 
with a point mutation implicated in human speech deficits. Current Biology, 
18, 354–362.
Haesler, S., Rochefort, C., Georgi, B., Licznerski, P., Osten, P., and Scharff, C. 
2007. Incomplete and inaccurate vocal imitation after knockdown of FOXP2 
in songbird basal ganglia nucleus area X. PLoS Biology, 5, 2885–2897.
Hamilton, W. D. 2005. Narrow roads of the gene land, vol. 3, Last words. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
Happé, F. 1995. Understanding minds and metaphors: Insights from the study of 
figurative language in autism. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, 10, 275–295.
Harcourt, A. H., and Stewart, K. J. 2007. Gorilla society: What we know and 
don’t know. Evolutionary Anthropology, 16, 147–158.
Hare, B., and Tomasello, M. 1999. Domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) use human 
and conspecific social cues to locate hidden food. Journal of Comparative 
Psychology, 113, 173–177.
Hare, B., Call, J., Agnetta, B., and Tomasello, M. 2000. Chimpanzees know 
what conspecifics do and do not see. Animal Behaviour, 59, 771–785.
Hare, B., Call, J., and Tomasello, M. 2001. Do chimpanzees know what conspe-
cifics know? Animal Behaviour, 61, 139–151.
———. 2006. Chimpanzees deceive a human competitor by hiding. Cognition, 
101, 495–154.
Hassabis, D., Kumaran, D., and Maguire, E. A. 2007. Using imagination to 
understand the neural basis of episodic memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 
14365–14374.
Hauser, M., and Carey, S. 1998. Building a cognitive creature from a set of 
primitives. In D. D. Cummins and C. Allen (eds.), The evolution of mind  
(pp. 51–106). New York: Oxford University Press.
Hauser, M. D., Chomsky, N., and Fitch, W. T. 2002. The faculty of language: 
What is it, who has it, and how did it evolve? Science, 298, 1569–1579.
Hayakawa, S. I. 1972. Language in thought and action. New York: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich.
Hayes, C. 1952. The ape in our house. London: Gollancz.
Heine, B., and Kuteva, T. 2007. The genesis of grammar. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. 
Hennessy, P. 1995. The hidden wiring: Unearthing the British constitution. 
London: Gollancz. 
Henry, O. 1910. The ransom of the red chief. Online at www.literaturecollection 
.com/a/o_henry/3/.
Henshilwood, C. S., d’Errico, F., Yates, R., Jacobs, Z., Tribolo, C., Duller, G.A.T.,  
et al. 2002. Emergence of modern human behaviour: Middle Stone Age en-
gravings from South Africa. Science, 295, 1278–1280.
Herman, L. M., Richards, D. G., and Wolz, J. P. 1984. Comprehension of sen-
tences by bottle-nosed dolphins. Cognition, 16, 129–219.

references   265
Hewes, G. W. 1973. Primate communication and the gestural origins of lan-
guage. Current Anthropology, 14, 5–24.
Hickok, G. S. 2009. Eight problems for the mirror neuron theory of action 
understanding in monkeys and humans. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
21, 1229–1243.
Hihara, S., Yamada, H., Iriki, A., and Okanoya, K. 2003. Spontaneous vocal 
differentiation of coo-calls for tools and food in Japanese monkeys. Neurosci-
ence Research, 45, 383–389.
Hockett, C. F. 1960. The origins of speech. Scientific American, 203(3), 88–96.
———. 1978. In search of love’s brow. American Speech, 53, 243–315.
Hodges, J. R., and Graham, K. S. 2001. Episodic memory: Insights from seman-
tic dementia. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: 
Biological Sciences, 356, 1423–1434.
Hoffecker, J. F. 2005. Innovation and technological knowledge in the Upper 
Paleolithic of northern Eurasia. Evolutionary Anthropology, 14, 186–198.
———. 2007. Representation and recursion in the archaeological record. Jour-
nal of Archaeological Method and Theory, 14, 359–387.
Hood, B. M. 2009. Why we believe in the unbelievable: From superstition to 
religion—the brain science of belief. San Francisco: HarperOne.
Hood, L. 2001. A city possessed: The Christchurch Civic Crèche case. Dunedin, 
New Zealand: Longacre Press.
Hopkins, W. D., Taglialatela, J. P., and Leavens, D. 2007. Chimpanzees dif-
ferentially produce novel vocalizations to capture the attention of a human. 
Animal Behaviour, 73, 281–286.
Hopper, P. J., and Traugott, E. C. 2003. Grammaticalization. 2nd edition. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Horne Tooke, J. 1857. Epea pteroenta or the diversions of Purley. London.
Horrobin, D. 2003. The madness of Adam and Eve: Did schizophrenia shape 
humanity? London: Bantam Press.
Hrdy, S. B. 2009. The evolutionary origins of mutual understanding. Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press. 
Humphrey, N. K. 1976. The social function of intellect. In P. P. G. Bateson and 
R. A. Hinde (eds.), Growing points in ethology (pp. 303–318). New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Hunt, G. R. 2000. Human-like, population-level specialization in the manu-
facture of pandanus tools by New Caledonian crows Corvus moneduloides. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B, 267, 403–413.
Hunt, G. R., and Gray, R. D. 2003. Diversification and cumulative evolution in 
New Caledonian crow tool manufacture. Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London, Series B, 270, 867–874
Ingvar, D. H. 1979. Hyperfrontal distribution of the cerebral grey matter flow 
in resting wakefulness: On the functional anatomy of the conscious state. 
Neurological Scandinavica, 60, 12–25.

266   references
Inoue, S., and Matsuzawa, T. 2007. Working memory of numerals in chimpan-
zees. Current Biology, 17(23), R1004–R1005.
Isaac, B. 1992. Throwing. In S. Jones, R. Martin, and D. Pilbeam (eds.), The 
Cambridge Encyclopedia of human evolution (p. 58). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Jackendoff, R. 2002. Foundations of language: Brain, meaning, grammar, evolu-
tion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
James, W. 1910. Psychology: The briefer course. New York: Holt.
Jarvis, E. D. 2006. Selection for and against vocal learning in birds and mam-
mals. Ornithological Science, 5, 5–14.
Jerison, H. J. 1973. Evolution of brain and intelligence. New York: Academic 
Press.
Johanson, D., and Edey, M. 1981. Lucy: The beginnings of humankind. New 
York: Simon and Schuster.
Johnson, F. 2000. I’m a soul man. The Spectator, 284 (N. 89581), 10–11.
Jürgens, U. 2002. Neural pathways underlying vocal control. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 26, 235–258.
Kamil, A. C., and Balda, R. P. 1985. Cache recovery and spatial memory in 
Clark’s nutcrackers (Nucifraga columbiana). Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Animal Behavior Processes, 85, 95–111.
Kaminski, J., Call, J., and Fischer, J. 2004. Word learning in a domestic dog: 
Evidence for “fast mapping.” Science, 304, 1682–1683.
Karlsson, F. 2007. Constraints on multiple center-embedding of clauses. Journal 
of Linguistics, 43, 365–392.
Kaufman, E. L., Lord, E. W., Reese, M. W., and Volkman, J. 1949. The discrimi-
nation of visual number. American Journal of Psychology, 62, 498–525.
Kay, R. F., Cartmill, M., and Barlow, M. 1998. The hypoglossal canal and the 
origin of human vocal behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences, 95, 5417–5419.
Kenneally, C. 2007. The first word: The search for the origins of language. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press.
Kéri, S. 2009. Genes for psychosis and creativity. Psychological Science, 20, 
1070–1073.
Kerr, R. A. 2009. The quaternary period wins out in the end. Science, 324, 1249.
Kingsley, M. 1897. Travels in West Africa, Cong Française, Corisco, and Camer-
oons. London: F. Cass (reprinted 1965).
Kirby, S., and Hurford, J. R. 2002. The emergence of linguistic structure: An 
overview of the iterated learning model. In A. Cangelosi and D. Parisi (eds.), 
Simulating the evolution of language (pp. 121–148). London: Springer Verlag.
Kirschmann, E. 1999. Das Zeitalter der Werfer. Hannover, Germany: Eduard 
Kirschmann Grunlinde 4, 30459.
Klein, R. G. 2008. Out of Africa and the evolution of human behaviour. Evolu-
tionary Anthropology, 17, 267–281.

references   267
Klein, S. B., Loftus, J., and Kihlstrom, J. F. 2002. Memory and temporal experi-
ence: The effects of episodic memory loss on an amnesiac patient’s ability to 
remember the past and imagine the future. Social Cognition, 20, 353–379.
Klima, S. E., and Bellugi, U. 1979. The signs of language. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press. 
Knight, A., Underhill, P. A., Mortensen, H. M., Zhivotovsky, L. A., Lin, A. A., 
Henn, B. M., et al. 2003. African Y chromosome and mtDNA divergence 
provides insight into the history of click languages. Current Biology, 13, 
464–473. 
Knight, C. 1998. Ritual/speech coevolution: A solution to the problem of decep-
tion. In J. R. Hurford, M. Studdert-Kennedy, and C. Knight (eds.), Approaches 
to the evolution of language (pp. 68–91). Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Kohler, E., Keysers, C., Umilta, M. A., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., and Rizzolatti, G. 
2002. Hearing sounds, understanding actions: Action representation in mirror 
neurons. Science, 297, 846–848.
Köhler, W. 1925. The mentality of apes. New York: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
(Originally published in German in 1917).
Konner, M. 1982. The tangled wing: Biological constraints on the human spirit. 
New York: Harper. 
Krause, J., Lalueza-Fox, C., Orlando, L., Enard, W., Green, R. E., Burbano, H. 
A., et al. 2007. The derived FOXP2 variant of modern humans was shared 
with Neandertals. Current Biology, 17, 1908–1912.
Kundera, M. 2002. Ignorance. New York: HarperCollins (translated by L. Asher). 
Kvavadze, E., Bar-Yosef, O., Belfer-Cohen, A., Boaretto, E., Jakeli, N., Matske­
vich, Z., et al. 2009. 30,000-year-old flax fibers. Science, 325, 1359.
Ladygina-Kohts, N. N. 2002. Infant chimpanzee and human child. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. (Translated from the 1935 Russian version by  
B. Vekker.)
Lai, C. S., Fisher, S. E., Hurst, J. A., Vargha-Khadem, F., and Monaco A. P. 2001. 
A novel forkhead-domain gene is mutated in a severe speech and language 
disorder. Nature, 413, 519–523. 
Langford, D. J., Crager, S. E., Shehzad, Z., Smith, S. B., Sotocinal, S. G., et al. 
2006. Social modulation of pain as evidence for empathy in mice. Science, 
312, 1967–1970.
Leakey, M. D. 1979. Footprints in the ashes of time. National Geographic, 155, 
446–457.
Leslie, A. M. 1994. ToMM, ToBY, and agency: Core architecture and domain 
specificity. In L. A. Hirschfeld and S. A. Gelman (eds.), Mapping the mind: 
Domain specificity in cognition and culture (pp. 119–148). New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Liberman A. M., Cooper F. S., Shankweiler, D. P., and Studdert-Kennedy, M. 
1967. Perception of the speech code. Psychological Review, 74, 431–461. 

268   references
Liebal, K., Call, J., and Tomasello, M. 2004. Use of gesture sequences in chim-
panzees. American Journal of Primatology, 64, 377–396.
Lieberman, D. E. 1998. Sphenoid shortening and the evolution of modern cra-
nial shape. Nature, 393, 158–162.
Lieberman, D. E., McBratney, B. M., and Krovitz, G. 2002. The evolution and 
development of cranial form in Homo sapiens. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 99, 1134–1139.
Lieberman, P. 1998. Eve spoke: Human language and human evolution. New 
York: Norton.
———. 2007. The evolution of human speech. Current Anthropology, 48, 39–46.
Lieberman, P., Crelin, E. S., and Klatt, D. H. 1972. Phonetic ability and related 
anatomy of the new-born, adult human, Neanderthal man, and the chimpan-
zee. American Anthropologist, 74, 287–307.
Liégeois, F., Baldeweg, T., Connelly, A., Gadian, D. G., Mishkin, M., and Vargha-
Khadem, F. 2003. Language fMRI abnormalities associated with FOXP2 gene 
mutation. Nature Neuroscience, 6, 1230–1237.
Lin, J.-W. 2006. Time in a language without tense: The case of Chinese. Journal 
of Semantics, 23, 1–53.
Liszkowski, U., Schafer, M., Carpenter, M., and Tomasello, M. 2009. Prelinguis-
tic infants, but not chimpanzees, communicate about absent entities. Psycho-
logical Science, 20, 654–660.
Littlewood, J. E. 1960. A mathematician’s miscellany. London: Methuen.
Locke, J. L., and Bogin, B. 2006. Language and life history: A new perspective 
on the development and evolution of human language. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 29, 259–325.
Loftus, E., and Ketcham, K. 1994. The myth of repressed memory. New York: 
St. Martin’s Press.
Loftus, E. F., and Loftus, G. R. 1980. On the permanence of stored information 
in the human-brain. American Psychologist, 35, 409–420.
Lotto, A. J., Hickok, G. S., and Holt, L. L. 2009. Reflections on mirror neurons 
and speech perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13, 110–114.
Lovejoy, C. O., Suwa, G., Spurlock, L., Asfaw, B., and White, T. D. 2009. The 
pelvis and femur of Ardipithecus ramidus: The emergence of upright walking. 
Science, 326, 71, 71e1–71e6.
Luria, A. R. 1968. The mind of a mnemonist: A little book about a vast memory. 
London: Basic Books.
Luyster, R. J., Kadlee, M. B., Carter, A., and Tager-Flusberg, H. 2008. Language 
assessment in toddlers with autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders, 38, 1426–1438.
Mackenzie, D. 2009. A ticket, a tasket, an Apollonian gasket. American Scien-
tist, 98(6), 10–14.
MacLarnon, A., and Hewitt, G. 2004. Increased breathing control: Another factor 
in the evolution of human language. Evolutionary Anthropology, 13, 181–197.

references   269
Maclean, P. D., and Newman, J. D. 1988. Role of midline frontolimbic cortex 
in production of isolation calls of squirrel-monkeys. Brain Research, 450, 
111–123.
MacNeilage, P. N. 2008. The origin of speech. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Malotki, E. 1983. Hopi time: A linguistic analysis of the temporal concepts in 
the Hopi language. Berlin: Mouton.
Marchant, J. 1916. Alfred Russel Wallace: Letters and reminiscences. London: 
Cassell.
Marean, C. W., Bar-Matthews, M. Bernatchez, J., Fisher, E., Goldberg, P.,  
Herries, A.I.R., et al. 2007. Early human use of marine resources and pigment 
in South Africa during the Middle Pleistocene. Nature, 449, 905–1011.
Marks, D. F. 2000. The psychology of the psychic. 2nd edition. New York: 
Prometheus Books.
Marks, D. F., and Kammann, R. 1980. The psychology of the psychic. Amherst, 
NY: Prometheus Books.
Markus, H., and Nurius, P. 1986. Possible selves. American Psychologist, 41, 
954–969.
Marler, P. 1991. The instinct to learn. In S. Carey and B. Gelman (eds.), The 
epigenesis of mind: Essays on biology and cognition (pp. 37–66). Hillsdale 
NJ: Erlbaum.
Marshall, J., Atkinson, J., Smulovitch, E., Thacker, A., and Woll, B. 2004. Apha-
sia in a user of British Sign Language: Dissociation between sign and gesture. 
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 21, 537–554.
Martin, R. 1992. Classification and evolutionary relationships. In S. Jones,  
R. Martin, and D. Pilbeam (eds.), The Cambridge encyclopedia of human 
evolution (pp. 17–23). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Marzke, M. W. 1996. Evolution of the hand and bipedality. In A. Lock and  
C. R. Peters (eds.), Handbook of symbolic evolution (pp. 126–154). Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Maudsley, H. 1873. Body and mind: An inquiry into their connection and mu-
tual influence. 2nd edition. London: Macmillan.
McCollom, M. A., Sherwood, C. C., Vinyard, C. J., Lovejoy, C. O., and Scha-
chat, F. 2006. Of muscle-bound crania and human brain evolution: The story 
behind the MYH16 headlines. Journal of Human Evolution, 50, 232–236.
McDougall, W. 1908. An introduction to social psychology. London: Methuen.
McGrew, W. C. 2010. Chimpanzee technology. Science, 328, 579–580.
McGurk, H., and MacDonald, J. 1976. Hearing lips and seeing voices. Nature, 
264, 746–748. 
McNeill, D. 1992. Hand and mind: What gestures reveal about thought. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
Mekel-Bobrov, N., Gilbert, S. L., Evans, P. D., Vallender, E. J., Anderson, J. R., 
Hudson, R. R., et al. 2005. On-going adaptive evolution of ASPM, a brain 
size determinant in Homo sapiens. Science, 309, 1720–1722.

270   references
Mellars, P. A. 2005. The impossible coincidence: A single-species model for the 
origins of modern human behavior in Europe. Journal of Human Evolution, 
14, 12–27.
———. 2006a. Going east: New genetic and archaeological perspectives on the 
modern colonization of Eurasia. Science, 313, 796–800.
———. 2006b. Why did modern human populations disperse from Africa ca. 
60,000 years ago? A new model. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 103, 9381–9386.
———. 2009. Origins of the female image. Nature, 459, 176–177.
Mellars, P. A., and Stringer, C. B. (eds.) 1989. The human revolution: Behavioral 
and biological perspectives on the origins of modern humans. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press.
Miles, H. L. 1990. The cognitive foundations for reference in a signing orang-
utan. In S. T. Parker and K. R. Gibson (eds.), Language and intelligence in 
monkeys and apes (pp. 511–539). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mitchell, D. B. 2006. Nonconscious priming after 17 years. Psychological Sci-
ence, 17, 925–929.
Mithen, S. 1996. The prehistory of the mind. London: Thames and Hudson.
———. 2005. The singing Neanderthals: The origins of music, language, mind, 
and body. London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson. 
Morell, V. 2009. Going to the dogs. Science, 325, 1062–1065.
Moscovitch, M., Nadel, L., Winocur, G., Gilboa, A., and Rosenbaum, R. S. 
2006. The cognitive neuroscience of remote episodic, semantic and spatial 
memory. Current Opinion in Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 179–190.
Müller, F. M. 1873. Lectures on Mr Darwin’s philosophy of language. Frazer’s 
Magazine 7 and 8. Reprinted in R. Harris (ed.) 1996, The origin of language 
(pp. 147–233). Bristol: Thoemmes Press.
Muir, L. J., and Richardson, I. E. G. 2005. Perception of sign language and its 
application to visual communication for deaf people. Journal of Deaf Studies 
and Deaf Education, 10, 390–401.
Mulcahy, N. J., and Call, J. 2006. Apes save tools for future use. Science, 312, 
1038–1040.
Myers, E. B., Blumstein, S. E., Walsh, E., and Eliassen, J. 2009. Inferior frontal 
regions underlie the perception of phonetic category invariance. Psychological 
Science, 20, 895–903.
Neidle, C., Kegl, J., MacLaughlin, D., Bahan, B., and Lee, R. G. 2000. The syn-
tax of American Sign Language. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Neisser, U. 2008. Memory with a grain of salt. In H. H. Wood and A. S. Byatt 
(eds.), Memory: An anthology (pp. 80–88). London: Chatto and Windus.
Nevins, A., Pesetsky, D., and Rodrigues, C. 2007. Pirahã exceptionality: A reas-
sessment. Online at http://ling.auf.net/lingBuzz/000411.
New, J., Cosmides, L., and Tooby, J. 2007. Category-specific attention for ani-
mals reflects ancestral priorities, not expertise. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 104, 16598–16603.

references   271
Newton, M. 2004. Savage girls and wild boys: A history of feral children. Lon-
don: Faber and Faber.
Nietzsche, F. W. 1986. Human, all too human: A book for free spirits. New 
York: Cambridge University Press. (Translated by R. J. Hollingdale; originally 
published 1878).
Nittrouer, S. 2001. Challenging the notion of innate phonetic boundaries. Jour-
nal of the Acoustical Society of America, 110, 1598–1605. 
Noonan, J. P., Coop, G., Kudaravalli, S., Smith, D., Krause, J., Alessi, J., et al. 
2006. Sequencing and analysis of Neanderthal genomic DNA. Science, 314, 
1113–1121.
Núñez, R., and Sweetser, E. 2006. With the future behind them: Convergent 
evidence from Aymara language and gesture in the crosslinguistic comparison 
of spatial construals of time. Cognitive Science, 30, 401–450.
O’Brian. P. 1989. The thirteen-gun salute. London: Harper-Collins.
Okuda, J., Fujii, T., Ohtake, H., Tsukiura, T., Tanjii, K., Suzuki, K., et al. 2003. 
Thinking of the past and future: The roles of the frontal pole and the medial 
temporal lobes. Neuroimage, 19, 1369–1380. 
Orwell, G. 1949. Nineteen eighty-four, a novel. London: Secker and Warburg.
Overskeid, G. 2007. Looking for Skinner and finding Freud. American Psychol-
ogist, 62, 590–595.
Papp, S. 2006. A relevance-theoretic account of the development and deficits 
of theory of mind in normally developing children and children with autism. 
Theory and Psychology, 16, 141–161.
Parker, E. S., Cahill, L., and McGaugh, J. L. 2006. A case of unusual autobio-
graphical remembering. Neurocase, 12, 35–49.
Patterson, F. 1978. Conversations with a gorilla. National Geographic, 154, 
438–465.
Patterson, N., Richter, D. J., Gnerre, S., Lander, E. S., and Reich, D. 2006. Ge-
netic evidence for complex speciation of humans and chimpanzees. Nature, 
441, 1103–1108.
Pavlov, I. P. 1927. Conditioned reflexes. Humphrey Milford: Oxford University 
Press.
Penn, D. C., Holyoak, K. J., and Povinelli, D. J. 2008. Darwin’s mistake: Ex-
plaining the discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds. Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, 31, 108–178.
Pepperberg, I. M. 1990. Some cognitive capacities of an African Grey parrot 
(Psittacus erithacus). Advances in the Study of Behavior, 19, 357–409.
———. 2000. The Alex studies: Cognitive and communicative abilities of gray 
parrots. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Petrides, M., Cadoret, G., and Mackey, S. 2005. Orofacial somatomotor responses 
in the macaque monkey homologue of Broca’s area. Nature, 435, 1325–1328.
Pettit, P. 2002. When burial begins. British Archaeology, 66 (August).
Pettito, L. A., Zatorre, R. J., Gauna, K., Nikelski, E. J., Dostie, D., and Evans,  
A. C. 2000. Speech-like cerebral activity in profoundly deaf people processing  

272   references
signed languages: Implications for the neural basis of human language. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 97, 13961–13966.
Pietrandrea, P. 2002. Iconicity and arbitrariness in Italian Sign Language. Sign 
Language Studies, 2, 296–321.
Piaget, J. 1928. Judgement and reasoning in the child. London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul.
Piattelli-Palmarini, M. (ed.) 1980. The debate between Jean Piaget and Noam 
Chomsky. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Pika, S., Liebal, K., and Tomasello, M. 2003. Gestural communication in young 
gorillas (Gorilla gorilla): Gestural repertoire, and use. American Journal of 
Primatology, 60, 95–111.
———. 2005. Gestural communication in subadult bonobos (Pan paniscus): 
Repertoire and use. American Journal of Primatology, 65, 39–61.
Pinker, S. 1994. The language instinct. New York: Morrow.
———. 1997. How the mind works. London: Penguin.
———. 2003. Language as an adaptation to the cognitive niche. In M. H. Chris-
tiansen and S. Kirby (eds.), Language evolution (pp. 16–37). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
———. 2007. The stuff of thought: Language as a window into human nature. 
London: Penguin.
Pinker, S., and Bloom, P. 1990. Natural language and natural selection. Behav-
ioral and Brain Sciences, 13, 707–784. 
Pinker, S., and Jackendoff, R. 2005. The faculty of language: What’s special 
about it? Cognition, 95, 201–236.
Pinkham, A. E., Hopfinger, J. B., Pelphrey, K. A., Pivers, J., and Penn, D. L. 2008. 
Neural basis for impaired social cognition in schizophrenia and autism spec-
trum disorders. Schizophrenia Research, 99, 164–175.
Pizzuto, E., and Volterra, V. 2000. Iconicity and transparency in sign languages: 
A cross-linguistic cross-cultural view. In K. Emmorey and H. Lane (eds.), 
The signs of language revisited: An anthology to honor Ursula Bellugi and 
Edward Klima (pp. 261–286). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ploog, D. 2002. Is the neural basis of vocalisation different in non-human 
primates and Homo sapiens? In T. J. Crow (ed.), The speciation of modern 
Homo Sapiens (pp. 121–135). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Poizner, H., Klima, E. S., and Bellugi, U. 1984. What the hands reveal about the 
brain. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Pollick, A. S., and de Waal, F. B. M. 2007. Apes gestures and language evolution. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104, 8184–8189.
Povinelli, D. J. 2001. Folk physics for apes. New York: Oxford University Press.
Povinelli, D. J., and Bering, J. M. 2002. The mentality of apes revisited. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 11, 115–119.
Povinelli, D. J., Bering, J. M., and Giambrone, S. 2000. Toward a science of other 
minds: Escaping the argument by analogy. Cognitive Science, 24, 509–541.

references   273
Powell, A., Shennan, S., and Thomas, M. G. 2009. Late Pleistocene demography 
and the appearance of modern human behavior. Science, 324, 1298–1301.
Premack, D. 1988. “Gavagai” or the future history of the animal language con-
troversy. Cognition, 23, 81–88.
———. 2007. Human and animal cognition: Continuity and discontinuity. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104, 13861–13867.
Premack, D., and Woodruff, G. 1978. Does the chimpanzee have a theory of 
mind? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 4, 515–526.
Provine, R. 2000. Laughter: A scientific investigation. London: Viking Penguin.
Pruetz, J. D., and Bertolani, P. 2007. Savanna chimpanzees, Pan troglodytes 
verus, hunt with tools. Current Biology, 17, 412–417.
Ramachandran, V. S. 2000. Mirror neurons and imitation learning as the driv­
ing force behind “the great leap forward” in human evolution. Edge, no. 69, 
May 29.
Randi, J. 1982. The magic of Uri Geller. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.
Read, D. W. 2008. Working memory: A cognitive limit to non-human primate 
recursive thinking prior to hominid evolution. Evolutionary Psychology, 6, 
676–714.
Reichenbach, H. 1947. Elements of symbolic logic. New York: Macmillan.
Rhine, J. B. 1937. New frontiers of the mind. New York: Farrar and Rinehart.
Richmond, C. 2003. Obituary to David Horrobin. British Medical Journal, 326, 
885.
Rivas, E. 2005. Recent use of signs by chimpanzees (Pan Troglodytes) in interac-
tions with humans. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 119, 404–417.
Rizzolatti, G., and Arbib, M. A. 1998. Language within our grasp. Trends in 
Neurosciences, 21, 188–194.
Rizzolatti, G., Camardi, R., Fogassi, L., Gentilucci, M., Luppino, G., and 
Matelli, M. 1988. Functional organization of inferior area 6 in the macaque 
monkey. II. Area F5 and the control of distal movements. Experimental Brain 
Research, 71, 491–507.
Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L., and Gallese V. 2001. Neurophysiological mechanisms 
underlying the understanding and imitation of action. Nature Reviews, 2, 
661–670.
Rizzolatti, G., and Sinigaglia, C. 2006. Mirrors in the brain: How our minds 
share actions and emotions. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Roberts, W. A., Feeney, M. C., MacPherson, K., Petter, M., McMillan, N., and 
Musolino, E. 2008. Episodic-like memory in rats: Is it based on when or how 
long ago? Science, 320, 113–115.
Roediger, H. L., and McDermott, K. B. 1995. Creating false memories—remem­
bering words not presented in lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Learning Memory and Cognition, 21, 803–814.
Rousseau, J.-J. 1782. Essai sur l’origine des langues. Geneva.
Roy, A. C., and Arbib, M. A. 2005. The syntactic motor system. Gesture, 5, 7–37.

274   references
Russell, B. A., Cerny, F. J., and Stathopoulos, E. T. 1998. Effects of varied vocal 
intensity on ventilation and energy expenditure in women and men. Journal 
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 239–248. 
Sacks, O. 1995. An anthropologist on Mars. New York: Vintage.
Saki (H. H. Munro) 1936. The short stories of Saki. New York: Viking.
Salmond, A. 1975. Mana makes the man: A look at Maori oratory and politics. 
In M. Bloch (ed.), Political language and oratory in traditional society (pp. 45– 
63). New York: Academic Press.
Saussure, F. de 1916. Cours de linguistique générale, ed. C. Bally and A. Seche-
haye, with the collaboration of A. Riedlinger. Lausanne: Payot; translated as 
W. Baskin 1977, Course in general linguistics. Glasgow: Fontana/Collins. 
Savage-Rumbaugh, S., Shanker, S. G., and Taylor, T. J. 1998. Apes, language, 
and the human mind. New York: Oxford University Press.
Savage-Rumbaugh, S., Wamba, K., Wamba, P., and Wamba, N. 2007. Welfare of 
apes in captive environments: Comments on, and by, a specific group of apes. 
Journal of Applied Animal Science, 10, 7–19.
Schacter, D. L., Addis, D. R., and Buckner, R. L. 2007. Remembering the past to 
imagine the future: The prospective brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8, 
657–661.
Schaller, G. 1963. The mountain gorilla. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Schoenemann, P. T., Sheehan, M. J., and Glotzer, L. D. 2005. Prefrontal white 
matter volume is disproportionately larger in humans than in other primates  
Nature Neuroscience, 8, 242–252.
Schroeder, D. I., and Myers, R. M. 2008. Multiple transcription start sites for 
FOXP2 with varying cell specificities. Gene, 413, 42–48.
Scoville, W. B., and Milner, B. 1957. Loss of recent memory after bilateral hip-
pocampal lesions. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 20, 
11–21.
Semaw, S., Renne, P., Harris, J. W. K., Feibel, C. S., Bernor, R. L., Fesseha, N.,  
et al. 1997. 2.5-million-year-old stone tools from Gona, Ethiopia. Nature, 385, 
333–336.
Semendeferi, K., Damasio, H., and Frank, R. 1997. The evolution of the frontal 
lobes: A volumetric analysis based on three-dimensional reconstructions of 
magnetic resonance scans of human and ape brains. Journal of Human Evolu-
tion, 32, 375–388.
Senju, A. Southgate, V., White, S., and Frith, U. 2009. Mindblind eyes: An absence 
of spontaneous theory of mind in Asperger Syndrome. Science, 325, 883–885.
Senghas, A., Kita, S., and Ôzyürek, A. 2004. Children creating core properties 
of language: Evidence from an emerging sign language in Nicaragua. Science, 
305, 1780–1782.
Shaw, B. 1948. Our theatres in the nineties. Vol. 2. London: Constable and Co.
Sheldrake, R. 1999. Dogs that know when their owners are coming home. New 
York: Three Rivers Press.

references   275
Sheldrake, R., and Morgana, A. 2003. Testing a language-using parrot for 
telepathy. Journal of Scientific Exploration, 17, 601–615.
Shermer, M. 1997. Why people believe weird things. New York: Henry Holt.
Shi, R. S., Werker, J. F., and Cutler, A. 2006. Recognition and representation of 
function words in English-learning infants. Infancy, 10, 187–198.
Shintel, H., and Nusbaum, H. C. 2007. The sound of motion in spoken lan-
guage: Visual information conveyed by acoustic properties of speech. Cogni-
tion, 105, 681–690.
Shintel, H., Nusbaum, H. C., and Okrent, A. 2006. Analog acoustic in speech. 
Journal of Memory and Language, 55, 167–177.
Sibley, C. G., and Ahlquist, J. E. 1984. The phylogeny of hominoid primates, as 
indicated by DNA-DNA hybridisation. Journal of Molecular Evolution, 20, 
2–15.
Sims, M. 2003. Adam’s navel: A natural and cultural history of the human form. 
London: Viking.
Skinner, B. F. 1957. Verbal behaviour. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
———. 1962. Walden two. New York: Macmillan.
Slocombe, K. E., and Zuberbühler, K. 2007. Chimpanzees modify recruitment 
screams as a function of audience composition. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 104, 17228–17233.
Snow, C. P. 1979. A coat of varnish. London: Macmillan.
Snowdon, C. T. 2004. Social processes in the evolution of complex cognition 
and communication. In D. K. Oller and U. Griebel (eds.), Evolution of com-
munication systems (pp. 132–150). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Sosis, R. 2004. The adaptive value of religious ritual. American Scientist, 92, 
166–172.
Sousa, C., Biro, D., and Matsuzawa, T. 2009. Leaf-tool use for drinking water 
by wild chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes): Acquisition patters and handedness. 
Animal Cognition, 12 (Suppl. 1), 115.
Southgate, V., Senju, A., and Csibra, G. 2007. Action anticipation through at-
tribution of false belief by 2-year-olds. Psychological Science, 18, 587–592.
Sperber, D., and Wilson, D. 1986. Relevance: Communication and cognition. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
———. 2002. Pragmatics, modularity and mind-reading. Mind and Language, 
17, 3–23.
Squire, L. R. 1992. Declarative and nondeclarative memory—multiple brain 
systems supporting learning and memory. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
4, 232–243.
Stedman, H. H., Kozyak, B. W., Nelson, A., Thesier, D. M., Su, L. T., Low, D. W., 
et al. 2004. Myosin gene mutation correlates with anatomical changes in the 
human lineage. Nature, 428, 415–418.
Stokoe, W. C. 2001. Language in hand: Why sign came before speech. Washing-
ton, DC: Gallaudet University Press.

276   references
Stokoe, W. C., Casterline, D. C., and Croneberg, C. G. 1965. A dictionary of Ameri­
can Sign Language on linguistic principles. Silver Spring, MD: Linstok Press.
Studdert-Kennedy, M. 1998. The particulate origins of language generativity:  
From syllable to gesture. In J. R Hurford, M. Studdert-Kennedy, and C. Knight 
(eds.), Approaches to the evolution of language (pp. 169–176). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
———. 2005. How did language go discrete? In M. Tallerman (ed.), Language 
origins: Perspectives on evolution (pp. 48–67). Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Suddendorf, T. 2006. Foresight and evolution of the human mind. Science, 312, 
1006–1007.
———. 2010. Episodic memory versus episodic foresight: Similarities and dif-
ferences. WIRES Cognitive Science, 1, 99–107.
Suddendorf, T., and Busby, J. 2003. Mental time travel in animals? Trends in 
cognitive Sciences, 7, 391–396.
Suddendorf, T., and Collier-Baker, E. 2009. The evolution of primate visual 
self-recognition: Evidence of absence in lesser apes. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society B, 276, 1671–1677.
Suddendorf, T., and Corballis, M. C. 1997. Mental time travel and the evolution 
of the human mind. Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs, 
123, 133–167.
———. 2007. The evolution of foresight: What is mental time travel, and is it 
unique to humans? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 30, 299–351.
Suddendorf, T., Corballis, M. C., and Collier-Baker, E. 2009. How great is great 
ape foresight. Animal Cognition, 12, 751–754.
Sutton, D., Larson, C., and Lindeman, R. C. 1974. Neocortical and limbic lesion 
effects on primate phonation. Brain Research, 71, 61–75.
Sutton-Spence, R., and Boyes-Braem P. (eds.) 2001. The hands are the head of the 
mouth: The mouth as articulator in sign language. Hamburg: Signum-Verlag.
Szpunar, K. K., Watson, J. M., and McDermott, K. B. 2007. Neural substrates of 
envisioning the future. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104, 
642–647.
Tanner, J. E., and Byrne, R. W. 1996. Representation of action through iconic 
gesture in a captive lowland gorilla. Current Anthropology, 37, 162–173.
Tattersall, I. 2002. The monkey in the mirror: Essays on the science of what 
makes us human. New York: Harcourt.
Taylor, R., and Wiles A. 1995. Ring-theoretic properties of certain Hecke alge-
bras. Annals of Mathematics, 141, 553–572.
Teleki, G. 1973. The predatory behavior of wild chimpanzees. Lewisburg, PA: 
Bucknell University Press.
Thieme, H. 1997. Lower Palaeolithic hunting spears from Germany. Nature, 
385, 807–810.
Thompson, N. S. 1969. Individual identification and temporal patterning in the 
cawing of common crows. Communications in Behavioral Biology, 4, 29–33.

references   277
Thorpe, S.K.S., Holder, R. L., and Crompton, R. H. 2007. Origin of human bi-
pedalism as an adaptation for locomotion on flexible branches. Science, 316, 
1328–1331.
Tomasello, M. 1999. The cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge: Har-
vard University Press.
Tomasello, M. 2003. Introduction: Some surprises for psychologists. In M. Toma-
sello (ed.), New psychology of language: Cognitive and functional approaches 
to language structure (pp. 1–14). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
———. 2008. The origins of human communication. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Tomaello, M., and Call, J. 1997. Primate cognition. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Tomasello, M., Call, J., Warren, J., Frost, G. T., Carpenter, M., and Nagell, K. 
1997. The ontogeny of chimpanzee gestural signals: A comparison across 
groups and generations. Evolution of Communication, 1, 223–59.
Tomasello, M., Hare, B., and Agnetta, B. 1999. Chimpanzees, Pan troglodytes, 
follow gaze direction geometrically. Animal Behaviour, 58, 769–777.
Tomasello, M., and Rakoczy, H. 2003. What makes human cognition unique? 
From individual to shared to collective intentionality. Mind and Language, 
18, 121–147.
Tooby, J., and DeVore, I. 1987. The reconstruction of hominid behavioral 
evolution through strategic modelling. In W. G. Kinzey (ed.), The evolution of 
human behavior: Primate models (pp. 183–237). New York: SUNY Press.
Toth, N., Schick, K. D., Savage-Rumbaugh, E. S., Sevcik, R. A., and Rumbaugh, 
D. M. 1993. Pan the tool-maker: Investigations into the stone tool-making 
and tool-using capabilities of a bonobo (Pan paniscus). Journal of Archeologi-
cal Science, 20, 81–91.
Treffert, D. A., and Christensen, D. D. 2006. Inside the mind of a savant. Scien-
tific American Mind, 17, 55–55.
Trivers, R. L. 1974. Parent-offspring conflict. American Zoologist, 14, 249–264.
Tulving, E. 1983. Elements of episodic memory. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
———. 2001. Episodic memory and common sense: How far apart? Philosophi-
cal Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 356, 1505–1515.
———. 2002. Episodic memory: From mind to brain. Annual Review of Psy-
chology, 53, 1–25.
Tulving, E., Schacter, D. L., McLachlan, D. R., and Moscovitch, M. 1988. Prim-
ing of semantic autobiographical knowledge. Brain and Cognition, 8, 3–20.
Uylings, H.B.M. (ed.) 1990. The prefrontal cortex: Its structure, function, and 
pathology. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
van Rijn, S., Swaab, H., and Aleman, A. 2008. Psychosis and autism as two 
developmental windows on a disordered social brain. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 31, 280–281.
Vargha-Khadem, F., Watkins, K. E., Alcock, K. J., Fletcher, P., and Passingham, R.  
1995. Praxic and nonverbal cognitive deficits in a large family with a genetically 

278   references
transmitted speech and language disorder. Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences, 92, 930–933.
Volterra, V., Caselli, M. C., Capirci, O., and Pizzuto, E. 2005. Gesture and the 
emergence and development of language. In M. Tomasello and D. Slobin (eds.), 
Beyond Nature-Nurture. Essays in Honor of Elizabeth Bates (pp. 3–40). Mah-
wah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Walenski, M., Mostofsky, S. H., Gidley-Larson, J. C., and Ullman, M. T. 2008. 
Brief report: Enhanced picture naming in autism. Journal of Autism and De-
velopmental Disorders, 38, 1395–1399.
Walsh, P. D., Abernethy, K. A., Bermejo, M., Beyersk, R., De Wachter, P., Akou, 
M. E., et al. 2003. Catastrophic ape decline in west equatorial Africa. Nature, 
422, 611–614.
Walter, R. C., Buffler, R. T., Bruggemann, J. H., Guillaume, M.M.M., Berhe, S. M.,  
Negassi, B., et al. 2000. Early human occupation of the Red Sea coast of 
Eritrea during the last interglacial. Nature, 405, 65–69.
Watkins, K. E., Strafella, A. P., and Paus, T. 2003. Seeing and hearing speech 
excites the motor system involved in speech production. Neuropsychologia, 
41, 989–994.
Watson, J. B. 1913. Psychology as the behaviorist views it. Psychological Re-
view, 20, 158–177.
Watson, J. B., and Rayner, R. 1920. Conditioned emotional reactions. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 3, 1–14.
Wearing, D. 2005. Forever today. New York: Doubleday. 
Wechkin, S., Masserman, J. H., and Terris, W. 1964. Shock to a conspecific as an 
aversive stimulus. Psychonomic Science, 1, 47–48.
Weir, A. A. S., Chappell, J., and Kacelnik, A. 2002. Shaping of hooks in New 
Caledonian crows. Science, 297, 981.
Westen, D. 1997. Toward a clinically and empirically sound theory of motiva-
tion. International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 78, 521–548.
Westergaard, G. C., Liv, C., Haynie M. K., and Suomi, S. J. 2000. A comparative 
study of aimed throwing by monkeys and humans. Neuropsychologia, 38, 
1511–1517.
Whiten, A., and Byrne, R. W. 1988. Tactical deception in primates. Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, 11, 233–244.
Whiten, A., Goodall, J., McGrew, W. C., Nishida, T., Reynolds, V., Sugiyama, Y., 
Tutin, C. E. G., Wrangham, R. W., and Boesch, C. 1999. Cultures in chimpan-
zees. Nature, 399, 682–685.
Whiten, A., Horner, V., and de Waal, F. B. M. 2005. Conformity to cultural 
norms of tool use in chimpanzees. Nature, 437, 737–740.
Whiten, A., McGuigan, N., Marshall-Pescini, S., and Hopper, L. M. 2009. 
Emulation, over-imitation and the scope of culture for child and chimpanzee. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364, 
2417–2428.

references   279
Whorf, B. L. 1956. Language, thought and reality. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Wiles, A. 1995. Modular elliptic curves and Fermat’s last theorem. Annals of 
Mathematics, 141, 443–451.
Wilson, D. S. 2002. Darwin’s cathedral: Evolution, religion, and the nature of 
society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wittgenstein, L. 2005. The big typescript, TS 213. (C. G. Luckhardt and M. A. E.  
Aue eds. and trans.) Oxford: Basil Blackwood.
Wodehouse, P. G. 1922. The clicking of Cuthbert. London: Herbert Jenkins.
Wood, B., and Collard, M. 1999. The human genus. Science, 284, 65–71.
Wrangham, R. 2009. Catching fire: How cooking made us human. New York: 
Basic Books.
Wundt, W. 1900. Die Sprache. 2 vols. Leipzig: Enghelman.
Wynn, C. D. L. 2004. Do animals think? Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Xua, J., Gannon, P. J., Emmorey, K., Smith, J. F., and Braun, A. R. 2009. 
Symbolic gestures and spoken language are processed by a common neural 
system. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106, 20664–20669.
Young, R. W. 2003. Evolution of the human hand: The role of throwing and 
clubbing. Journal of Anatomy, 202, 165–174.
Zeshan, U. 2002. Sign language in Turkey: The story of a hidden language. 
Turkic Languages, 6, 229–74.
Zipf, G. K. 1949. Human behavior and the principle of least-effort. New York: 
Addison-Wesley.


Index
ABSL (Al-Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language), 
32, 123, 230n30
Acheulian industry, 205–6
adolescence, 202
African exodus, 210
Alexander, Richard D., 194
American Sign Language (ASL), 31, 47, 59, 
64, 66, 119, 123
amnesia, 85–87
anatomical changes, and origin of speech, 
72–74
Anaxagoras, 248n24
animal communication, 17, 19–20, 34, 36–54
animal rights movement, 152
animals: and autism, 138–39; and compre-
hension of human speech, 44–46; and 
language, 154; and mental time travel, 
154; and recursion, 51–54, 227n10, 
227n12; and repetition, 10; and self-
awareness, 148–49; and theory of mind, 
144–48, 154. See also names of species
animal vocalizations, 36–37; emotional, 
38; as signal to distinguish species, 38; 
voluntary control of, 38–39
animal welfare legislation, 152
antidecompositionalism, 230n38
antipsychiatry movement, 243n23
ape-hominin split, 55, 71, 102, 164, 
181–83, 189, 191, 198, 231n9, 247n4
apes. See names of species; primates
Apollonian gasket, 4
Apollonius, 4
Arbib, Michael, 60–61
Ardipithecus ramidus, 183–84, 185
Aristotle, 28, 248n24
arms race, 190
Armstrong, David F., Gesture and the 
Nature of Language (with Stokoe and 
Wilcox), 59
Aronoff, Mark, 31–32, 230n38
Arthur, W. Brian, 218–19, 224
aspect, verbal, 241n10
Asperger’s syndrome, 139, 143, 161, 
243n18
Austen, Jane, Pride and Prejudice, 159
australopithecines, 183
Australopithecus afarensis, 183, 189, 198
Australopithecus sediba, 192
autism, 138, 143, 158, 160, 244n27
autistic-psychotic spectrum, 140–44
autistic spectrum disorder, 160
autonoetic awareness, 85
Aymara, 119
Ayurveda, 110
Baldwin, James Arthur, 81
Barkow, Jerome, The Adaptive Mind (with 
Cosmides and Tooby), 12
Baron-Cohen, Simon, 138, 140, 142
Barth, John: Autobiography: A Self-recorded 
Fiction, 3; Frame-Tale, 2
Bartlett, Sir Frederic C., 240n9
Bass, Ellen, The Courage to Heal (with 
Davis), 95
bats, 154
Beck, Benjamin B., 205
Beckett, Samuel, What is the word?, 158
behaviorism, 97, 121, 153
belief, inference of, 135–36
Bellugi, Ursula, 59
Bernheim, Hippolyte, 94
Beyerstein, Barry L., 225
Bickerton, Derek, 48–49, 56, 234n2
Bierce, Ambrose, 1
big bang theory of language evolution, 56, 
167, 230n30, 233n56
Bingham, Paul, 190
Bininj Gun-Wok, 27
biological stance, 148
bipedal hominins, 182
bipedalism, 63, 183–91, 247n12, 248n20; 
facultative vs. obligate, 183; hand- 
assisted, 184; and language, 191; nega-
tive aspects of, 186

282   index
birds: and counting, 227n12; and memory 
feats, 154; migratory, 154; and recursion, 
52–54, 227n10; and tactical deception, 
147–48; and tool use, 105–6, 250n83; 
and vocal learning, 39–42; and www 
memory, 103–4. See also names of species
birdsong, repetitive nature of, 10
Bischof-Köhler hypothesis, 105
Blombos Cave, 211, 216
Bloom, Paul, 28, 56; Descartes’ Baby, 172
Boë, L.-J., 237n77
Bogin, Barry, 201–2
bonobos, 181, 232n30; comprehension 
of human speech, 44–45; and gesture, 
50–51; and mental time travel, 106; 
as quadrupeds, 183–84; and signed 
language, 47–48; and speech, 43–44; 
and tactical deception, 148; and tool use, 
240n25; use of signs, 163
Botswana, 76
Bougainville Island, 27
Boyd, Brian, 125
brain, human, 249n66; Broca’s area, 60, 
61, 71; Brodman area 44, 60; cheater-
detection module, 136; development of, 
196–200; evolution of, 142; hippocam-
pus, 85–86, 88, 176–77, 239n11; hip-
pocampus minor, 176–77; motor cortex, 
61; prefrontal cortex, 200; Wernicke’s 
area, 61
brain activation: fMRI scans of, 101; and 
memory retrieval, 238n7; in schizophre-
nia and autism, 244n27
brain size, 196–97, 249n62
British Sign Language, 69
Broca’s area, 60, 61, 71
Brodman area 44, 60
Bronowski, Jacob, 188
Brown, Dan, Da Vinci Code, 227n6
Buin, Uisia dialect of, 27
Bulwer-Lytton, Edward, 2
Burianova, H., 238n7
Burling, Robbins, 67
Butler, Samuel, 19–20
Byrne, Richard, 50, 148; The Thinking 
Ape, 147
Calvin, William H., The Throwing Ma-
donna, 187
canine intelligence, 232n36, 244n45
capuchin monkeys, 189
Carey, Susan, 244n49
catastrophes, 222
center-embedding, 28, 52–53, 229n5
Chamberlain, Lindy, 186
Chase, Stuart, Tyranny of Words, 151
Chater, Nick, 34
Chauvet Cave, 214
cheater-detection module, 136
chess, 8–9
childhood: as crucible of recursive mind, 
202; and emergence of grammatical  
language, 201; and theory of mind,  
201
childhood stage, 202
children, and protolanguage, 48–49. See 
also infants
chimpanzee culture, 49–50, 252n35
chimpanzees, 154, 177, 181, 185, 229n32, 
231n9, 232n30, 232n33, 232n35; calls 
of, 37–38; and counting, 245n7; and 
displaced reference, 117; evolution of, 
247n4, 247n10; and gesture, 50–51, 
162–65; hand of, 188–89; and imitation, 
49; and mirror test, 149; and problem 
solving, 49–50; as quadrupeds, 183–84; 
and signed language, 47; and speech, 
43–44; survival of, 170; and symbolic 
representation, 116; and tactical decep-
tion, 148; and theory of mind, 145–47, 
150, 243n12; and throwing, 189; and 
tools, 106, 204–5
Chinese language, 118–19, 123
Chomsky, Noam, 7–8, 20, 34–35, 51–52, 
121, 151, 180, 212, 225–26, 227n13; 
and linguistic diversity, 29; and Pro-
metheus, 56; view of language, 23–25, 55
Christiansen, Morten, 34
Cicero, 28–29
Clayton, Nicola, 103
Clever Hans, 42
click languages, 212–13
Clifford, Paul, 2

index   283
CMAH (CMP-N-acetylneuraminic acid 
(CMP-Neu5Ac) hydroxylase), 249n59
cognitive arms race, 136
cognitive fluidity, 14
cognitive linguistics, 155
cognitive niche, 194
combinatorial rules, 124
concatenation, of phrases, 30
concept formation, 30–31
conceptual-intentional system, 51
Condillac, Abbé Étienne Bonnot de, 57–58
conditioning: classical, 96–97, 240n32; 
operant, 97–98
content words, 29–30
conventionalization, 64, 66–67
core network, 101
Cosmides, Leda, 13; The Adaptive Mind 
(with Barkow and Tooby), 12
counting, 223, 227n12; birds and, 227n12; 
chimpanzees and, 245n7; as human 
ability, 8
Cox, Nigel, Tarzan Presley, 231n12
creativity, and psychosis, 142–44
cricket (game), 248n17, 248n21, 248n22
Critchley, MacDonald, The Language of 
Gesture, 59
crocodiles, 249n47
Cro-Magnon humans, 215–17
crosswords, 246n22
Crow, Timothy, 56, 212, 235n4
crows, 105–6
cultural diversity, 218
Damasio, Hanna, 249n66
Darwin, Charles, 58, 77, 144, 186–87, 189, 
216, 221; The Descent of Man in Rela-
tion to Sex, 19, 173; Expression of the 
Emotions in Man and Animals, 133–34; 
On the Origin of Species by Means of 
Natural Selection, 173
Davis, Laura, The Courage to Heal (with 
Bass), 95
Davis, Percival, Of Pandas and People 
(with Kenyon), 174
Deacon, Terrence, 116, 249n66; The Sym-
bolic Species, 41, 178
death, human understanding of, 108–9
de Morgan, Augustus, 3
Dennett, Daniel, 136–37, 157
Descartes, R né, 1, 107, 132, 171–73, 176
De Villiers, Jill, 246n33
de Waal, Franz B. M., 144; Chimpanzee 
Politics, 243n12
Diamond, Jared, 220; Guns, Germs, and 
Steel, 218
Dirac, Paul, 143–44
discrete infinity, 8
displacement: human infants and, 117; use 
of term, 81
DNA hybridization, 183
Dobzhansky, Theodosius, 174
dogs: and comprehension of human 
speech, 44; domestication of, 232n36; 
intelligence of, 232n36, 244n45; Pavlov’s 
experiments with, 97; and telepathy, 42; 
and theory of mind, 147
Donald, Merlin, Origin of the Human 
Mind, 63
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 159
dualism, innate, 171–73, 246n6
duality of patterning: and ABSL, 32; and 
Hockett, 32
Dunbar, Robin, 137, 197, 224
ebola haemorrhagic fever, 170
echolocation, in bats, 154
Edinburgh, University of, Koestler Parapsy-
chology Unit, 132
E-language, 7, 23–24, 29, 151; and natural 
selection, 55–56
elephants, 39, 41, 196
Elizabeth, Princess of Palatine, 171–72
ELIZA computer program, 129
embedding: in birdsong, 52–54; of con-
sciousness, 106; of events, 119; in music, 
7; of pairs, 52; of phrases, 22, 26, 30, 
35, 85, 124, 127, 230n18; of processes, 
14–15; recursive, 9, 203, 227n14; vs. 
recursive structure, 6; self-similar, 6; of 
structures, 20; of time, 107
emotion, 133–34; and autism, 138–39
empathizers vs. systematizers, 142
e

encephalization quotient (EQ), 197
end-embedding, 28
English, as SVO language, 123
episodic foresight, 240n2
episodic future thinking, 100
Eubulides of Miletus, 23
Evans, Nicholas, 26–28, 76
Everett, Daniel L., 25–26, 33–35, 109, 220, 
241n15, 241n16
evolution, Darwinian, 173–78
evolutionary psychology, 136, 228n22; re-
cursion and, 12–15; and theory of mind, 
139; use of term, 228n20
eye, as example of design, 174
Facchini, Fiorenzo, 175, 246n10
factor analysis, 228n19
factorials, 4–5
false belief, 135–36
fast mapping, 44
Fauconnier, Gilles, 155
feedback systems, 11
Fermat’s last theorem, 225
Fertile Crescent, 218
Fibonacci series, 5, 227n6, 228n18
fiction: and language, 124–26; and mental 
time travel, 110–11
fire: controlled use of, 195; human use of, 
251n6
Fitch, Tecumseh, 6, 20, 23, 51–52, 234n71
FLB (faculty of language in the broad 
sense), 51, 234n68
fleas, recurring problem of, 3, 227n4
flight: bird, 248n41; human, 248n38
FLN (faculty of language in the narrow 
sense), 51, 161, 234n68
fMRI (functional magnetic brain imaging), 
62, 101, 101, 238n7
Fodor, Jerry, 152, 156; Modularity of 
Mind, 228n20
Forster, Margaret, 84; Hidden Lives, 83
fox hunting, 152
Frank, R., 249n66
freeloaders, 136
Frege, Gottlob, 121
function words, 29–30
Galen, 177
Gardner, Allen and Beatrix, 47
gaze, 146
Geller, Uri, 132
gender agreements: and autistic-psychotic 
spectrum, 140–44; reversal of, 27
gene flow, from Neandertal to non-African 
H. sapiens, 250n1
General Semantics, 151
generativity, and language, 121–24
genes: abnormal spindle-like microcephaly 
associated gene (ASPM), 199; FOXP2, 
70–72, 79, 212–13, 251n18, 251n29; 
MCPH6 (microcephalin), 199; MYH16, 
249n62; Neuregulin 1, 244n32; Proto-
cadherin11XY, 235n4
genetic basis of human speciation,  
235n4
Georgia State Board of Education, and 
evolution, 174
gesture, 237n88; as language, 50; and 
origins of language, 161–65; persistence 
of, 78–79; and speech, 67–70, 74–78. 
See also signed languages
Givón, Talmy (Tom), 33
God, human knowledge of, 137–38
Gomero Island, 238n91
Goodall, Jane, 37, 42, 112
Google, 224
gorillas, 38–39, 170, 181, 185, 231n11; 
as quadrupeds, 183–84; and signed lan-
guage, 47; and tactical deception, 148
Göring, Hermann, 152
Grady, C. L., 238n7
grammar: rewrite rules of, 21; universal 
(See universal grammar)
grammar gene, 200
grammaticalization, 29–31, 57, 233n56; 
use of term, 230n30
Grandin, Temple, 138, 158, 161, 243n18; 
Animals in Translation, 138–39
Graves, Robert, Beware Madam!, 40
Grice, Paul, 155–56, 158
Griffin, Donald R.: Animal Minds: Beyond 
Cognition to Consciousness, 153; The 
Question of Animal Awareness, 153
284   index

index   285
Grodzinsky, Y., 235n23
Gui (language), 76–77
Hadzabe, and click languages, 213
Hamilton, William D., 140, 158, 225
hand, human/hominin, 189, 248n24
hand-mouth connection, 68
haplogroups, 208; of Homo sapiens, 
209; L0, 208–9, 209, 210, 212; L1, 
208–9, 209, 210; L2, 208, 209, 210; L3, 
208–11, 209, 210, 216; M, 209, 209, 
210; N, 209, 209, 210
Happé, Francesca, 160
Hare, Brian, 146–47
Hauser, Mark, 20, 51–52, 234n71, 244n49
Hayakawa, Samuel Ichiye, Language in 
Thought and Action, 151
Hayes, Cathy and Keith, 43
Heavenly Creatures (film), 242n29
Hebb, Donald O., 114, 241n4
Heinrich events, 211
Hennessy, Peter, 10
Henry, O. (William Sydney Porter), The 
Ransom of Red Chief, 159
Henshilwood, Christopher S., 211
Hewes, Gordon W., 59
hippocampus, 85–86, 88, 176–77, 239n11
hippocampus minor, 176–77
Hockett, Charles F., 32, 65–66, 81
Hoffecker, John F., 206, 212
Hohle Fels Cave, 215
Holyoak, Keith J., 149–50, 178
hominid, use of term, 229n33, 247n1
hominin, 181, 250n73; hands of, 189; 
use of term, 229n33. See also names of 
species
Homo antecessor, 192 
Homo erectus, 192, 195, 203, 250n73
Homo ergaster, 63, 192, 203; and brain 
size, 198
Homo floresiensis, 250n73
Homo habilis, 73, 191–92; and brain size, 
198
Homo heidelbergensis, 192
Homo Neandertalensis, 192; and brain 
size, 198. See also Neandertals
Homo rudolfensis, 191–92; and brain size, 
198; and tools, 205
Homo sapiens, 167–68, 192; and brain 
size, 198; emergence of, 206–7; and 
migration, 204; and recursion, 181
Hopi language, 120
Horrobin, David, 143
horses, 42
Hottentots, and throwing, 187
House That Jack Built, The, 20–21, 28
Hrdy, Sarah Blaffer, 193–94
Humboldt, Wilhelm, 8
hummingbirds, 39–40
Humphrey, Nicholas K., 194
Huxley, Aldous, Brave New World, 240n32
Huxley, Thomas Henry, 176–77
hyena, 192
hypoglossal canal, 73
Iatmul, 26
iconic representations, in signed languages, 
65
I-language, 7, 23–25, 51, 151, 226; map-
ping to E-language, 29; and natural 
selection, 55–56; use of term, 229n12, 
234n68
Ilgar, 28
implicatures, 156
imprinting, 141–43
infants: adaptability of, 207; and articula-
tion, 237n77; and contact with others, 
194; and declarative function, 163; and 
displaced reference, 116–17; and distinc-
tion of words, 233n41; and false belief, 
136, 139, 146; and gestural vs. vocal 
communication, 164, 201; and hand-
mouth connection, 68; and language 
deficits, 245n15; and phonemes, 77, 
238n96; and pointing, 163–64
inference, and recursion, 129
infinite sequences, recursion and, 4
infinity, concept of, 8
Ingvar, David, 101
innate concepts, 152
instincts, 96
insular dwarfism, 250n73

286   index
intelligent design, 174–76, 246n10
intentionality, orders of, 137
intentional stance, 136–37, 157
International Commission on Stratigraphy, 
248n32
irony, 245n16; and theory of mind, 159–61
isolating languages, 123
Italian Sign Language, 64
iteration: and recursion, 11–12, 228n18; 
and time, 108
iterative procedures in computational 
mathematics, 11
Jackendoff, Ray, 6–7, 49
Jackson, Peter, 242n29
James, Henry, 8
James, William, 110
James Randi Educational Foundation, 
242n1
Jarvis, Erich D., 39–41
Jerison, Harry J., 197
Johnson, Frank, 172
Jones, Judge John, III, 175
Journal of Parapsychology, 132
Kammann, Richard, Psychology of the 
Psychic (with Marks), 132
Kayardild, 28
Kenyon, Dean, Of Pandas and People (with 
Davis), 174
killer whales, 39
Kingsley, Charles, The Water Babies, 176
Kingsley, Mary, 74–75
Kirschmann, Eduard, 188; Das Zeitalter 
der Werfer, 187
Klein, Richard, 56, 216
Klima, Edward S., 59
knuckle-walking, 183–85
Koestler, Arthur, 132
Köhler, Wolfgang, 49, 102, 153
Kozybski, Count Alfred, 151
Kundera, Milan, Ignorance, 89
L3 lineage, expansion and migration of, 
209–14
Ladygina-Kohts, Nadesha, 43–44, 232n33, 
232n35
“Lady of Flora” (Homo floresiensis), 
250n73
Laing, R. D., Knots, 139–40
Lamb, Charles, 143
language: adapted to the brain, 34; 
bipedalism and, 191; comprehension of, 
44–46; demands of neural storage, 196; 
diversity of, 26–29; emergence of, in 
Homo sapiens, 56; evolution of, 23–25, 
29, 34, 230n30, 233n56, 234n2; and fic-
tion, 124–26; and generativity, 20, 121– 
24; gestural origins of, 57–59; and men-
tal capacity, 164; and mental time travel, 
113–14; and mimesis, 63–67; and mirror 
neurons, 60–62; Noam Chomsky’s view  
of, 23–25; nonrecursive, 25–26; and re-
cursion, 20–23; and social fortresses, 218;  
and theory of mind, 154–58; and time, 
117–21; uniqueness of, 180; used for 
teaching, 126–27. See also names of in­
dividual languages
language, written, influence of, 28
language deficits, 245n15
language instinct, 33
language of thought hypothesis, 151–52
Laongo National Park, 205
Latin, 122–23
laughter, human, 37
Lenguaje de Signos Nicaragüense (NSL), 
30–31, 230n30
Leslie, A. M., 244n49
Levallois technology, 206
lexigrams, 47
Liberman, Alvin, 61–62
libraries, 224
Lieberman, Daniel, 73
Lieberman, Philip, 72–73
linearization, 29
Linguistic Society of Paris, 19; and evolu-
tion of language, 55
lions, 40
literacy, tradition of, 28
literalism, 160–61
literary critics, before postmodernism, 20
Livy, 28–29
Locke, John L., 201–2
Loftus, Elizabeth, 93–95

index   287
Lovejoy, Owen, 184
Lucy, 183, 198, 249n52
Luria, Aleksandr Romanov, The Mind of a 
Mnemonist, 91
lyre bird, 41, 147–48
macaque, brain of, 61
Machiavelli, Niccolò, The Prince, 136
Machiavellian intelligence, 136
MacNeilage, Peter F., 67
Makeba, Miriam, 209
Malotki, Ekkehart, 120
Maori, 76, 194
Marks, David, 243n3; Psychology of the 
Psychic (with Kammann), 132
Markus, Hazel, 110
Marler, P., 231n42
marmosets, 38, 244n41
Marzke, Mary, 188
massive modularity hypothesis, 228n20
Maudsley, Henry, 143
McCarthy, Robert, 237n85
McDougall, William, 131–32
McGurk, Harry, 68
McGurk effect, 236n53
meadow voles, 103–4
media, unifying language influence, 230n23
Melanesia, 27
Mellars, Paul, 210–12, 215
memories: false, 93–95; recovered, 239n27; 
true vs. false, 239n27, 239n28
memory: autobiographical, 84; declarative, 
88; episodic, 84, 86–87, 92, 98, 100, 
103, 110, 112–13, 124, 126, 196, 238n3, 
240n9; fragility of, 88–90; implicit, 
87–89, 98; recursive, 202; semantic, 84, 
86–87, 98–99, 126, 238n3; short-term, 
238n9; and time, 100; unconscious, 
87–88; working, 14, 238n9; www 
(what, where, when), 103 (See also www 
criterion)
memory retrieval, and brain activation, 
238n7
memory systems, evolution of, 95–99
mental capacity, and language, 164
mental states, recursive embedding of, 
227n14
mental time travel, 100–101, 105, 200, 
226; animals and, 102–6; and fiction, 
110–11; prehistory of, 109
Merge, 7, 51–52
Merge, unbounded, 23–24, 35
Merge operation, 23–24
Mesoamerica, 218
metaphor, and theory of mind, 159–61
Middle Stone Age, 208, 212
migrations, 203–4, 210
Milne, A. A., Winnie the Pooh, 9–10, 36
Milton, John, Paradise Lost, 170
mimesis, 63–64
mind: human, distinguished from other 
animals, 1; Swiss-army-knife model of, 
12–13. See also theory of mind
mindblindness, 138
mind-body dualism, 171–73
minimalism, 158; use of term, 245n13
Minimalist Program, 7, 23, 51
minimum characteristic, recursion as, 20, 34
mirror neurons, 60–62, 61, 235n24
mirror system, 60–61, 70–71
mirror test, 148–49
Mithen, Steven, 14; Singing Neanderthals, 
41
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), 208
mitochondrial Eve, 209, 251n3
modular theory: of human mind, 12–15; 
and submodules, 156–57; and theory-of-
mind module, 156
Morgana, Aimee, 41–42
morphemes, 31–32; attached to verbs, 117
morphic resonance, 133
morphology, 32–33
Morris, Robert, 132
“motherese” (“parentese”), 45
motor theory of speech perception, 61, 
235n24
Mount Toba, eruption of, 217
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, Piano Con-
certo in G Major, 53
Müller, Friedrich Max, 19
myosin-heavy chain (MYH16), 199
Namibia, 76
Nash, Ogden, 227n4

288   index
natural language, as exercise in minimal-
ism, 158
natural numbers, 4
natural selection, 173–78
Nature, 234n71
Navajo language, 76
Neandertals, 71–73, 206, 237n72, 237n77, 
237n85, 248n20, 250n1; and burial of 
dead, 109; extinction of, 215
Neisser, Ulric, 110
neocortex, size of, 197
neocortical ratio, 197
Neu5Gc (N-glycolylneuraminic acid), 
249n59
New Guinea, 26–27, 220
Newton, Sir Isaac, 219
Nietzsche, Friedrich, Human, All Too Hu-
man, 69–70
noun/verb distinction, 242n25
Nurius, Paula, 110
object/action distinction, 242n25
objects, personification of, 140
O’Brian, Patrick, Thirteen-Gun Salute, 
233n45
ochre, 211
Oldowan industry, 205
orangutan, 181, 184, 233n45; and tactical 
deception, 148
ornamentation, personal, 214
Orrorin tugenensis, 183
Orwell, George, Nineteen Eighty-four, 151
Owen, Richard, 176–77
Papp, Szilvia, 160
parrots, 40–42, 223, 227n12
participant, use of term, 240n33
Pascal, Blaise, 169
patterning, duality of, 32
Patterson, Francine, 47
Pavlov, Ivan P., 96–97
Pearse, Richard William, 248n38
Peek, Kim, 90–91
Penn, Derek C., 149–50, 178
people people, 158, 244n30
Pepperberg, Irene, 223
Pepys, Samuel, 46–47
periodic form, development of, 28–29
personification, of objects, 140
Pfungst, Oskar, 42
Philological Society of London, 19
phonemes, 31, 235n25; differentiation of, 
77; used in language, 76–77
phrases: concatenation of, 30; embedding 
of, 22, 26, 30, 35, 85, 124, 127, 230n18
Piaget, Jean, 135
pineal gland, 171, 176
Pinker, Steven, 6–7, 13–14, 28, 33, 48, 
113, 116, 152, 154; and emergence of 
language, 56; and grammar gene, 200; 
How the Mind Works, 12; and language 
as instinct, 96; and onomatopoeia, 65
Pirahã, 25–26, 33–35, 109, 220, 230n18, 
241n15, 241n16, 252n5; and time, 
119–21
Plato, 242n25; Cratylus, 236n41
Pleistocene, 12, 15, 167; evolution during, 
191–95
Pliocene, and global cooling, 191
Ploog, Detlev, 235n7
pointing, to share information, 162–64
Potter, Beatrix, 36
Povinelli, Daniel, 49, 145–46, 149–50, 178
pragmatics, 156, 161
prefrontal cortex, 200
Premack, David, 14, 144–45
present time, 118
primates: and signed languages, 46–51; 
and tactical deception, 148. See also 
names of species
problem solving, 233n58
proposition, 22–23
protolanguage, 48–50, 230n30, 233n56, 
234n2
Provine, Robert, Laughter: A Scientific 
Investigation, 37
Psalms, Book of, 170
psi, 133
psychokinesis, 132
psychosis, 139; and creativity, 142–44
Qafzeh Cave site (Israel), 109

index   289
Ramachandran, Vilayanur, 60
Randi, James, The Truth About Geller,  
132
Read, Dwight W., 14
recursion: center-embedded, 20–21; defini-
tion of, 1–2, 6; and evolutionary psy-
chology, 12–15; fifth-order, 243n16; and 
inference, 129; vs. iteration, 11–12; as 
key to human mind, 178–80; language 
as, 20–23; as minimum characteristic, 
20, 34; nature of, 1–16; origins of, 206; 
as process, 7, 8; vs. repetition, 9–11; as 
structure, 7, 8
recursive embedding, 203
recursive manufacture, 186
recursive parsing, birds and, 52–54
reference time, 118
relational reinterpretation theory, 149–50
relevance, maximizing, 156–57
relevance theory, 156–57
religion: and intelligent design, 175; and 
theory of evolution, 172–73; and theory 
of mind, 137–38; and time, 108–10
repetition, vs. recursion, 9–11
rewrite rules, 229n7
rhesus monkeys, and mirror test, 149
Rhine, Joseph B., New Frontiers of the 
Mind, 131–32
Rizzolatti, Giacomo, 60–61
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 58
rugby, 248n20
runaway recursion, 179
runaway social selection, 195
runaway theory of mind, 144, 150
Russell, Bertrand, 23
saber-tooth cats, 192
Sacks, Oliver, An Anthropologist on Mars, 
138
Sahelanthropus tchadensis, 183
Saki (H. H. Munro), 10; Tobermory, 36
Sally-Anne test, 135, 146
Salmond, Anne, 76
San, and click languages, 213
Sapir, Edward, 120
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, 120
sarcasm, 159
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 64–65, 115
Savage-Rumbaugh, Sue, 44, 47, 233n50
savant syndrome, 90, 92–93, 143
Schacter, Daniel L., 101
schizophrenia, 139, 141, 143, 244n27
schizotypal personality, 140
sciatica, 186
scrambling languages, 123
scrub jay, 103–4
self, extended in time, 110
self-awareness, in animals, 148–49
Semendeferi, K., 249n66
sentence, 22–23; periodic, 28–29
sexual abuse, 94–95, 239n27, 239n28
Shakespeare, William: Henry IV, 234n70; 
Henry V, 192–93; Henry VIII, 79; 
Twelfth Night, 9, 109
Shaw, George Bernard, and throwing (liter-
ary stones), 190
Sheldrake, Rupert, 133; Dogs That Know 
When Their Owners Are Coming Home, 
42
Shereshevskii, Solomon, 91
Sidgwick, Henry, 131
Sierpinski triangle, 4
signal detection theory, 239n28
signed languages, 65, 236n33, 236n41, 
236n55; animals and, 46–51; as true 
languages, 46, 235n15. See also names 
of languages
Silbo Gomero, 238n91
singing, 41. See also birdsong
Skinner, B. F., 121, 242n22; Walden Two, 
97–98
Snow, C. P., Coat of Varnish, 242n28
Snowdon, Charles T., 38–39
social bonding, 195
social intelligence, 136
Society for Psychical Research, 131
Spectator, The (magazine), 2–3
speech: and gesture, 67–70, 74–78; 
impenetrability of, 76; intentionality of, 
39; origin of, and anatomical changes, 
72–74; parts of, 28; and vocal learning, 
39. See also language

290   index
speech time, 118
Sperber, Dan, 156–57
spider, 10
Squire, Larry, 239n11
starlings, 234n70; and recursion, 52–54, 
53, 227n10
Stokoe, William C., Gesture and the Na-
ture of Language (with Armstrong and 
Wilcox), 59
stories. See fiction
Stumpf, Professor, 42
subitization, 227n12
subject (experimental), use of term, 240n33
submodules, 156–57
Suddendorf, Thomas, 100, 102, 240n2, 
245n16
SVO languages, 123
Swift, Jonathan, 227n4; A Modest Pro-
posal, 159
symbolic representation, 114–17, 179
systematizers vs. empathizers, 142
tactical deception, 147–48
tamarins, 234n71, 234n73
Tanner, Joanne, 50
Tattersall, Ian, 72
telepathy, 42, 131, 176
texting, 116
theoretical physics, 242n30
theory of mind, 129, 133–38, 180, 202, 
226, 243n12, 244n49; animals and, 
144–48; cognitive aspects of, 144; and 
language, 154–58; and recursion, 137; 
recursive nature of, 35; and religion, 
137–38
theory-of-mind module, 156
things people, 158, 244n30
thought, 2
Three Mountains Test, 135
throwing, 186–91
time: grammar of, 112–27; and human 
condition, 106–10; and language, 117– 
21; linear concept of, 241n28; and re­
cursion, 107–8; and religion, 108–10
time measurement, 107–8
Tiriyo, 28
Tomasello, Michael, 25, 28, 49–50, 162–63
ToMM-1, 244n49
ToMM-2, 244n49
Tooby, John, 13; The Adaptive Mind (with 
Barkow and Cosmides), 12
Tooke, John Horne, 122
tools, 214; manufacture of, 204–6
tool use: bonobos and, 240n25; and men-
tal time travel, 105–6
Tower of Hanoi task, 87
Trivers, Robert, 136
Tulving, Endel, 85–87, 238n3
Turkish Sign Language, 66
Uisia (dialect), 27
United States, southwestern, 218
universal grammar, 23–25, 27–29, 33, 35; 
use of term, 229n12, 234n68
Universal Theory, 238n96
universal toolkit, for language, 35
Upper Paleolithic (Late Stone Age),  
214–17
Uylings, H. B. M., 249n66
Vanuatu, 27
Vatican, 246n10
verb tense, 117
vervet monkeys, and symbolic representa-
tion, 116
Vestiges of the Natural History of Cre-
ation, 173
visual language. See names of languages; 
signed languages
vocal learning, 39–40
Vogel, J. W., 187
volcanism, 251n32
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 173, 176
Walpiri language, 123
Watson, John B., 97, 153
Watts, David, 108
Wearing, Clive, 85, 100
Wearing, Deborah, 85
Wernicke’s area, 61
Western Arnhem Land, 27–28
whale, 196
Whitehead, Alfred North, 121
Whiten, Andrew, 148, 252n35

index   291
Whitman, Walt, Leaves of Grass, 10
Whorf, Benjamin Lee, 120
Wilcox, Sherman E., Gesture and the Na-
ture of Language (with Armstrong and 
Stokoe), 59
Wiles, Andrew, 225
Wilson, David Sloan, 125, 156–57
Wilson, Deirdre, 156
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 78
Woodruff, Guy, 145
word order, 122
words: combinatorial structure of, 31–33; 
“necessary,” 122; as primitives, 242n24; 
segregation of, 233n41; stored in seman­
tic memory, 126; transmutation of, 
233n40
Wrangham, Richard, 195
Wundt, Wilhelm, 58–59
www criterion, 112
Wynn, Clive, 153; Do Animals Think?, 152
!Xóõ (language), 76–77
Young, Richard W., 188
Zipf, G. K., Human Behavior and the 
Principle of Least-Effort, 115
Zipf’s law, 115


