Good at motivating and encouraging 
Good at motivating and encouraging 
Good at motivating and encouraging 


Translated from the Latin, with an Essay & Commentary,  
by Hoyt Hopewell Hudson
With a new foreword by Anthony Grafton
princeton university press
princeton and oxford
Alternative Education Plan 
Alternative Education Plan 
Alternative Education Plan 
Plan 
Plan 

Copyright © 1941, 1969 by Princeton University Press
New foreword © 2015 by Princeton University Press
Requests for permission to reproduce material from this 
work should be sent to Permissions, Princeton University 
Press
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street
Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press,  
6 Oxford Street, Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1TW
press.princeton.edu
All Rights Reserved
First Princeton Paperback Edition, 1970
First Princeton Classics Edition, with a new foreword by  
Anthony Grafton,  2015
Paperback ISBN: 978-0-691-16564-6
Library of Congress Control Number:  2015930404
Original cloth edition designed by P. J. Conkwright
Printed on acid-free paper. ∞
Printed in the United States of America.
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

a prelude to the praise of folly: foreword 
to the princeton classics edition
acknowledgments
the folly of erasmus: an essay
preface: desiderius erasmus to his friend 
thomas more
moriae encomium, that is, the praise of folly
analysis
notes
index of proper names
vii
xxiii
xxv
1
7
129
143
155


A Prelude to The Praise of Folly
FOREWORD TO THE PRINCETON CLASSICS EDITION
T
he Praise of Folly began as an elaborate joke, 
to be shared with a close friend. According 
to an old story, in 1499, when Desiderius 
Erasmus of Rotterdam first came to England, 
he met a brilliant young man at the table of 
the Lord Mayor of London. The two of them argued: cut 
followed thrust, learned joke capped learned joke. Finally, 
Erasmus said, “Either you are More, or no one.” Erasmus 
was right, and Thomas More, his dinner companion, 
replied, in the same spirit: “You are either Erasmus, or the 
devil.” In fact, Erasmus and More were properly introduced. 
But that was pretty much the only proper thing about 
their friendship—which grew, as the story suggests, from a 
shared sense of humor. In 1505, when Erasmus returned to 
England, they worked together on translations from Greek 
into Latin. Their author, Lucian, was a satirist—like them, a 
learned joker.
In 1509, as Erasmus rode back over the Alps from a 
triumphant tour of Italy, he decided that it would be fun to 
devote his learning and style to an ingenious paradox. He 
began to think about composing a paradox—a work in praise 
of folly. The connection to his friendship with More was 
evident from the start. Erasmus gave his text the Greek title 
Μωρίας ′Eγκώμιον (Morias Encomion)—a praise of folly, but 
[ vii ]

[ viii ]
THE PRAISE OF FOLLY
also a punning praise of More. Once he arrived in London, 
he found himself confined by ill health to More’s house. So 
he drafted the text. By the summer of 1510, he had finished 
the text and written a letter of dedication to More. It came 
out in 1511.
Erasmus’s little book announced from the start that it 
belonged to an ancient genre of pedantic humor. Since 
antiquity, orators had practiced, as one of their standard 
exercises, the writing of speeches in praise of people, 
buildings, and cities. And since antiquity, satirists had made 
fun of these speeches by writing parodies of them. They 
pretended to praise, as Erasmus put it, “Busirises, Phalarises, 
quartan fevers, flies, baldness, and pests of that sort” [9]. 
In praising Folly, Erasmus made clear he worked within 
the classical tradition in literature—a point he went on to 
underline by casting his work in elaborate, demanding Latin 
and by stuffing it with allusions, not only to Lucian but also 
to other favorite writers, from the Roman poet (and satirist) 
Horace to Plato.
Yet the finished book was too long, too serious, and too 
challenging to be nothing more than an ingenious paradox. 
Erasmus not only invoked the conventions of ancient 
rhetoric; he then broke with them. Instead of writing in his 
own voice or creating the character of an orator to speak in his 
place, he portrayed Folly herself as speaking to an assembly 
of the learned, dressed in cap and bells and attended by 
servants named Philautia (self-love), Kolakia (flattery), 
Lethe (forgetfulness) and Misoponia (hatred of work). And 
instead of confining himself to gentle mockery, he produced 

[ ix ]
FOREWORD TO THE PRINCETON CLASSICS EDITION
a complex, puzzling and often-polemical discourse on 
contemporary society and religion.
The text starts without pyrotechnics. Folly claims credit 
for the existence of the human race, since “that foolish, even 
silly, part, which cannot be named without laughter, is the 
propagator of the human race.” When she goes on to point 
out that the pleasantest times of life are childhood and old 
age, and to argue that what men like best in women is their 
folly, she remains within the bounds of literary irony. But 
then she adds new colors to her self-portrait. Folly is not just 
the engine of procreation and the source of fun at banquets. 
She is the source of illusions. And only illusions make life 
possible. Folly tricks everyone into seeing nonexistent 
good qualities in themselves and others. Her magic enables 
husbands to tolerate wives, wives to tolerate husbands, and 
teachers to tolerate students. Without Folly, no one could 
bear his companions, to say nothing of himself: “were you to 
bar me out, each man would be so incapable of getting along 
with any other that he would become a stench in his own 
nostrils, his possessions would be filthy rags, and he would 
be hateful to himself” [28]. Human society, as Folly presents 
it, is not a cheerful array of old men and women playing with 
babies, but a hideous parade of the ugly and the infirm, the 
stupid and the cowardly, none of them able to see themselves, 
or one another, as they are—a procession scarier than that of 
the flagellants in Ingmar Bergman’s The Seventh Seal. Only the 
delusions that Folly creates enable these monstrous creatures 
to make stable relationships with one another and to form a 
larger society.

[ x ]
THE PRAISE OF FOLLY
Yet exposing these ugly truths is only the beginning 
of Folly’s project. Suddenly we find that she has stopped 
describing the shared follies of the human race and begun 
describing the various orders of society, starting with 
obsessive hunters and builders of new buildings, alchemists, 
and gamblers. The ironic encomium has become a different 
kind of text entirely—as Folly herself finally confesses, when 
she breaks off “for fear I should seem to compose a satire 
rather than pronounce a eulogy” [103]. And Folly has more 
important targets in view than wealthy sufferers from the 
Edifice Complex. Her satire takes in most social estates, but 
concentrates on powerful and problematic sets of clerics: 
theologians who confuse their obsessive concern with tiny 
distinctions between abstract concepts with the study of 
God; priests, bishops, and popes who mistake their titles 
and finery, their pursuit of titles and money, for the proper 
occupation of Christian priests; and monks who confound 
their maniacal efforts to follow pedantic, meaningless rules 
with true piety. Folly has turned on those who supposedly 
embody wisdom and piety, and exposed the hollowness of 
their claims.
Still, she is not done. In the third and shortest part of 
her speech, Folly pivots again—this time to the teachings 
of Christianity and philosophy. What looks to humans like 
wisdom, she argues, is really madness—as the prophets, Jesus 
and Paul all proclaimed, in passages that she deftly cites. 
True Christianity, Folly argues, yields none of the things 
that ordinary, prudent men and women seek: not wealth, 
not power, not fame. Instead, it offers “the foolishness of the 

[ xi ]
FOREWORD TO THE PRINCETON CLASSICS EDITION
cross,” by which Jesus brought healing to sinful humanity. 
Happily, Christianity is not the only subversive force at 
work, in a world that needs all the subversion it can get. True 
philosophy, she argues, is not a pursuit of useless knowledge 
or sophisticated logical tricks, but “a study of death,” in 
Plato’s words, “because it leads the mind away from visible 
and bodily things, and certainly death does the same.” True 
Christianity and true philosophy converge. Both teach those 
who embrace them to be fools to this world, “rapt away in 
the contemplation of things unseen” [120]. Existing schools 
and universities, popular theological schools and doctrines, 
which fail to teach these follies, are the pillars of a world that 
has turned itself upside down, mistaking death for life. By 
contrast, the experience of true religion is “Moriae pars”—
“the portion of Folly,” [124] but also “the portion of More,” 
and—according to a variant that appears in some editions 
of the text—“Mariae pars,” “the portion of Mary,” the lot of 
the contemplative sister of the busy Martha in the Gospel of 
Luke. Folly has taught a deeply serious lesson.
This complicated book, with its edgy movements from 
one plane of discourse to another, astonished and amused 
some readers but enraged many others. Scandal helped to 
make it a bestseller: before Erasmus died in 1536, twenty-one 
printers in eleven different cities issued thirty-six editions of 
it. As Erasmus revised the text, he deliberately lengthened 
and sharpened some of the passages that most infuriated 
conservatives—such as his discussions of theologians and 
monks, and of Christian folly. And he succeeded in provoking 
reactions. In September 1514, the Louvain professor Martin 

[ xii ]
THE PRAISE OF FOLLY
van Dorp—who had been and would later be his friend—
told him how harshly the theologians in his influential 
faculty rejected what they saw as Erasmus’s deliberate effort 
to annoy: “Only a few approved of the text in all respects. 
What’s going on?, they asked. Even if what he has written 
is the truth, what sort of madness is it to wear oneself out in 
order to be hated?…What good does it do to flagellate the 
order of theologians so savagely?…And can pious ears bear 
to hear the idea that Christ and the blessed life are folly…For 
it’s not just that this is false and scandalous: it could be the 
ruin of weaker brethren.”
Yet Erasmus showed no embarrassment. He denied that 
he had slandered anyone, since he had named no names. And 
he not only stood by his text, but also continued to work 
on it, in the hope of enhancing its impact. In 1515 a friend, 
Gerald Listrius, submerged Erasmus’s original text in a long 
commentary set in smaller type, much of which Erasmus 
himself dictated. Normally, only ancient texts enjoyed the 
privilege of receiving a formal gloss. In essence, Listrius and 
Erasmus were claiming the status of a classic for Erasmus’s 
brilliantly defiant speech. Erasmus himself made clear again 
and again that he saw a direct connection between The Praise of 
Folly and his more formal projects in scholarship and theology. 
This little, informal book did more than any of Erasmus’s 
larger, weightier works to define his career as thinker and 
writer. And in many ways, that was only right.
By the time The Praise of Folly came out, Erasmus had already 
accomplished an extraordinary amount. Born in the later 
1460s, the illegitimate son of a well-educated priest, he grew 

[ xiii ]
FOREWORD TO THE PRINCETON CLASSICS EDITION
up in the Low Countries and entered the religious order 
of the Augustinian Canons. Later he would claim that like 
many other novices, he had taken his vows while too young 
to make a proper decision. In school and in his convent, he 
was exposed to a particular strain of late medieval piety. The 
Modern Devotion, a movement founded by Geert Groot in 
the later fourteenth century, was not a radical movement. 
But those who joined it believed that Christians should 
lead simple lives, and concentrate on improving their souls 
by meditation. This movement produced some classics of 
contemplative writing—notably The Imitation of Christ. Erasmus 
never lost the conviction that the core of Christianity consisted 
in the pursuit of inward piety, not in the grand rituals of the 
prelates or the ascetic practices of monks and friars.
He also gained access to some of the Latin classics, which 
became his passion—a passion that he shared with the head of 
his convent and his friends there. The schools and universities 
of Northern Europe had concentrated, since the thirteenth 
century, on the study of formal logic and its application to 
theology and law. A student’s progress on a career—in the 
university, the church, and even in public life—hinged on his 
prowess at the cut and thrust of argument. In the fifteenth 
century, however, so-called humanists—specialists on classical 
Latin literature—began to open schools and offer university 
courses, in which they taught the classics in a very different 
way. The humanists argued that the best way to prepare 
students for life was to offer them the sort of education that 
had formed ancient Romans like Cicero: a grounding in the 
Latin classics, to give them access to the best that had been 

[ xiv ]
THE PRAISE OF FOLLY
thought and said; study of history and moral philosophy, to 
form their characters; and a training in rhetoric, to make them 
effective speakers and writers. To find the path to follow in 
church or state, they argued, one should simply imitate the 
examples of good conduct recorded in ancient texts, and the 
best way to induce others to do this was not to defeat them in 
argument but to persuade them to agree.
From very early in his life, Erasmus was captivated by the 
humanists’ vision of education and culture. In a youthful 
polemic, Against the Barbarians, he defended the study of 
the classics and the active, engaged life. Those clerics who 
refused to study the pagans, one speaker in Erasmus’s 
dialogue declared, resembled Jews, who wrongly thought 
that they could attain salvation by abstaining from certain 
foods. Only divine inspiration could explain the excellence 
of pagan moral thought and the eloquence of classical prose 
and verse. Erasmus’s skill in composing Latin verse won him 
an appointment as secretary to a bishop and, in time, the 
chance to move to the University of Paris. Though disgusted 
by the austerity and bad food at his college, he mastered 
enough scholastic theology to know that he disapproved of 
its method, and managed to break into print as a content 
provider, composing a Latin text to fill an empty space in a 
book by a more prominent writer.
At the end of the fifteenth century, Erasmus served as tutor to 
an English nobleman, Lord Mountjoy, whom he accompanied 
on a visit to England. There and elsewhere he began to be 
known for his skill at teaching the young how to read and 
emulate the classics. Erasmus worked hard at mastering the 

[ xv ]
FOREWORD TO THE PRINCETON CLASSICS EDITION
tools of the humanist’s trade. He took the time to write out an 
elaborate paraphrase of the Italian humanist Lorenzo Valla’s 
Elegancies of the Latin Language, a detailed treatment of Latin 
prose usage, one of whose prefaces asserted that good Latin 
is a “sacrament”—an outward sign of inward grace. He created 
and published textbooks—a set of Latin proverbs, for example, 
from which schoolboys could gain both good principles and 
powerful expressions, and model Latin dialogues, from which 
they could learn how to carry on lively conversations in pure 
Latin. Above all, he mastered Greek, perhaps inspired by 
contact with English scholars like William Grocyn, who had 
studied the language in Italy. Unable to find a competent 
teacher in Paris or the Low Countries, he taught himself, first 
to read and then to write classical Greek. Within a few years 
he knew the Greek language and Greek literature as well as 
anyone in Western Europe.
For all his sharp-tongued defense of classicism, Erasmus 
was a Christian first and foremost. Contact with a reforming 
Franciscan, Jean Vitrier, reinforced his belief that true 
Christianity was a matter not of ritual and other externals, 
but of the spirit. He composed what he called an Enchiridion 
for the Christian Soldier: a manual on what Christian piety really 
required of the layman. Modern readers have sometimes found 
this book dull and conventional. Erasmus’s contemporaries, 
by contrast, found it astonishing and challenging: a new 
vision of Christianity, which insisted that pious laymen and 
laywomen were the spiritual equals of those traditionally 
called the “religious,” the members of orders. Traditionalists 
saw him as denying the value of central Christian practices, 

[ xvi ]
THE PRAISE OF FOLLY
such as the formal vows that monks took and the pilgrimages 
by which so many lay people tried to gain merit. Radicals 
found him inspiring. One priest, condemned as a heretic in 
1543, recalled that when he read Erasmus’s book, “he was as 
if struck by lightning” when he realized that the author “says 
that there are in reality two ways, a way of salvation and a 
way of judgment”—and, by implication, no Purgatory and no 
need to engage in the practices by which so many Christians 
tried to win time off from it in advance. The Enchiridion, which 
Erasmus later equipped with an inspiring prefatory letter, 
depicting all of Christian society as a community of the spirit, 
also became a best seller.
Most important of all, perhaps, was an encounter in a 
library. Lorenzo Valla had drawn up a commentary on the 
New Testament, in which he used the Greek text to identify 
corruptions in the Latin Vulgate and correct them. Erasmus 
found a manuscript of this text in a library in the Low 
Countries. He published it, with a powerful preface. And he 
became determined to follow Valla’s example systematically: 
to use the Greek original texts of the New Testament to 
provide a new Latin translation, which would be more 
accurate and more engaging than the standard Vulgate text.
In 1506, Erasmus took two pupils with him to Italy. 
He obtained a doctorate in theology by examination in 
Turin. He watched Pope Julius II celebrate his conquest of 
Bologna—a spectacle that disgusted him, as it embodied in a 
single incident everything that bothered him most about the 
church as an institution, from its engagement in warfare to its 
materialism. Most important, he made a connection with the 

[ xvii ]
FOREWORD TO THE PRINCETON CLASSICS EDITION
most brilliant and original Italian printer of the day, Aldus 
Manutius, a Roman who had settled in Venice. In the winter 
or spring of 1507–08, Erasmus moved into Aldus’s printing 
house. There, working with the learned Greeks who edited 
classical texts for Aldus, he read rare Greek texts and expanded 
the little collection of proverbs that he had issued in Paris into 
something much bigger. He assembled 3260 sayings, Greek 
and Latin, and explicated each of them in a short essay. Aldus 
published the finished work in September 1508.
The Adages established Erasmus as the dominant scholar of 
his day: a master of ancient literature, who moved easily from 
Homer to Augustine, and a master Latinist, whose prose was 
richer and more compelling than that of any of his Italian 
contemporaries. His essays on individual sayings brilliantly 
elucidated the proverbs in question, drawing on a vast range 
of sources in which they appeared and showing students how 
to use them in their own essays. Anyone who read Erasmus’s 
book knew that if he needed to urge a friend to finish a task, 
he should write “Manum de tabula” (take your hand off the 
picture); if he needed to advise the same friend not to irritate 
the powerful, he could write “Ne ignem gladio fodias” (don’t 
poke the fire with a sword); and if he needed to evoke for 
the friend the host of troubles that could be unleashed by 
excess curiosity, he must mention “Pandora’s box.” Erasmus 
made mistakes (in the original Greek of Hesiod, Pandora 
opened a jar, not a box). But the Adages became one of the 
most successful of Erasmus’s works. Everywhere but in 
Italy, where Catholic censorship limited the circulation of 
the text, “Pandora’s box” became a proverbial expression in 

[ xviii ]
THE PRAISE OF FOLLY
the vernacular language, thanks to writers who had learned 
the story from the Adages. Erasmus even found ways to teach 
his favorite Christian morals. His conviction, based on the 
Gospels, that there was no such thing as a “just war” for 
Christians, found expression in the adage “Dulce bellum 
inexpertis” (war is very sweet to those who have never tried 
it), which he explicated in one of his most powerful essays.
On the heels of this triumph, established as both a great 
teacher and a brilliant author, Erasmus rode his horse over 
the Alps, thinking about Folly. His satire showed how a 
creative classicist could address contemporary problems in 
powerful Latin. It displayed all the resources that Erasmus 
had assembled in the busy years in which he had made himself 
a scholar—not least the proverbs that he had compiled in 
the Adagia, and that Folly quotes on many pages, sometimes 
twisting their wording or meaning. It made clear that study 
of theology should rest on direct study of the New Testament, 
ideally in its original Greek, and that the ideal reader of 
Scripture would ignore, or at least remain independent of, 
the medieval commentators and theologians. And it revealed 
that, in Erasmus’s view, the central message of the greatest 
ancient writers—in this case, Plato—was entirely compatible 
with the central message of the New Testament.
The Praise of Folly was a manifesto of Christian classicism 
and biblical study—a pair of pursuits that, for Erasmus, went 
naturally together. It must have seemed entirely natural to 
him that Dorp attacked him in one and the same letter both 
for publishing his satire of theology and for planning a new 
translation of the New Testament, based on the original Greek. 

[ xix ]
FOREWORD TO THE PRINCETON CLASSICS EDITION
He defended both enterprises in a single public letter to Dorp, 
as did his friend More. In many ways, the pursuits in which 
he engaged for decades to come, until he died in 1536—from 
editing and commenting on the Gospels, to fighting for 
pacifism until he was pressured into abandoning it, to arguing 
fiercely with both Catholic conservatives and Protestant 
rebels—were all adumbrated in this single short book.
Hoyt Hudson’s elegant translation, first issued by 
Princeton University Press in 1941, is still one of the best 
English versions of this demanding text. Hudson, who 
had a deep training in Greek and Latin as well as English 
literature, taught public speaking and English at Swarthmore, 
Princeton, and Stanford. As interested in the history of 
oratory as in its modern practice, he drew on his mastery of 
the classical tradition in rhetoric to shed a new light on the 
complex structure of Erasmus’s work. A Quaker, he also felt 
a deep sympathy for Erasmus’s approach to the reform of 
spirituality and society.
Yet puzzles remain. Though it seems clear that The Praise of 
Folly summed up much of Erasmus’s intellectual and spiritual 
development, readers in his own time and since have never 
been certain exactly how to evaluate the text as a whole. Are its 
parts to be taken equally seriously? Does Erasmus really believe 
in the argument of the first part of the text, with its vision of 
humans caught, as inextricably as the people in The Matrix, in a 
web of delusions, without which they would see themselves and 
others as they are and shrink in horror? Does he really want us 
to accept the argument of the third part, with its vision of true 
Christianity as a flight, as radical as that of Plato’s philosopher 

[ xx ]
THE PRAISE OF FOLLY
leaving the cave, from the apparent reality in which we live to 
a higher one? Does he really stand by the sharp satire of the 
second part, which seems to condemn the very institutions and 
individuals whose support enabled Erasmus to carry out his 
work, as gospel truth? Folly herself, after all, calls her whole 
enterprise into question in her conclusion. She ends her speech 
with an apology: “If anything I have said shall seem too saucy 
or too glib, stop and think: ‘tis Folly, and a woman, that has 
spoken” [125]. She even insists that she can’t remember a 
word that she has said. Yet she also reminds her hearers of a 
Greek proverb, ‘Even a foolish man will often speak a word in 
season,’ unless, perhaps, you assume that this does not extend 
to women” [125]. What, exactly, does Erasmus want us to do 
with his book?
In the years after 1516, when his edition of the New 
Testament appeared, Erasmus issued paraphrases of its 
books: long, eloquent retellings and interpretations of the 
Gospels and Epistles. His paraphrase of Paul’s letter to the 
Romans begins with an explanation. Paul, he says, keeps 
shifting registers in the letter, because he keeps shifting 
audiences as well, and an effective letter must above all speak 
to its intended readers:
He considers now the Jews, now the Gentiles, now both: 
sometimes he addresses believers, sometimes doubters; at 
one point he assumes the role of a weak man, at another 
of a strong: sometimes that of a godly man, sometimes of 
an ungodly man. The result of all this is that the reader, 
wandering about as though in some kind of confusing 
labyrinth or winding maze, does not see very well whence 
he has entered or how he may leave.

[ xxi ]
FOREWORD TO THE PRINCETON CLASSICS EDITION
The reader must imagine himself in many forms, and 
sometimes as “two men in one,” a carnal man and a spiritual 
one, in order to follow Paul and take away the multiple 
lessons that he means to teach.
Erasmus’s description of Paul’s reader, wandering, baffled, 
along the twisting paths of his epistle, fits the experience 
of many readers of The Praise of Folly. It shows that Erasmus 
did not see apparent contradictions in a text, or problems 
in how to apply its teachings, as evidence that it was not 
deeply meaningful. In fact, it suggests that the apparent 
contradictions and difficulties may have been part of the lesson 
of the text. In later years, when Martin Luther broke with the 
Catholic church and challenged Erasmus for his failure to do 
the same, Erasmus argued that humans could not attain as 
much certainty as Luther claimed to have about the central 
doctrines of Christianity. While seeing the faults in the old 
church, accordingly, he thought it more sensible to stay with 
it than to join a new one, whose claims he could not, as a mere 
human, adjudicate. The Praise of Folly seems to undermine every 
certainty to which Erasmus’s contemporaries could cling. But 
it also undermines itself and the morals that it seems to teach. 
In the words of the modern novelist and philosopher J.M. 
Coetzee, “the power of the text lies in its weakness…just as 
its weakness lies in its power to grow, to propagate itself, to 
beget Erasmians.”
One reader—perhaps the ideal one—seems to have read 
the text exactly in this way: as a work both deeply serious, 
and designed to provoke thought rather than to put forward 
firm conclusions. In 1516 Thomas More published his own 

great flight of fancy, Utopia—another book with a Greek title 
(in Greek, Utopia literally means no place). This dazzling 
Latin book begins with a sharp critique of English society 
and an impressive but inconclusive debate about whether a 
wise man could take part in political life without becoming 
corrupt. In Book II, Raphael Hythloday, the character who 
offers social criticism in Book I, describes a very different 
society, one without private property (or Christianity). At 
the very end of the book, More, who claims that he has 
transcribed Hythloday’s words, reappears. Speaking in his 
own voice, he warns the reader that private property can 
never be eliminated without destroying all order in society. 
Is Utopia, the state portrayed in Book II, an ideal society? Is 
England as corrupt as More’s spokesman argues in Book I? 
What does More want the reader to take away? Erasmus, who 
loved the book, took charge of its reception. He prepared 
editions in which his marginal notes brought out the text’s 
critical lessons. No wonder he felt such enthusiasm: More, 
whom he had long seen as a kindred spirit, crafted his own 
complex, self-questioning satire on the last that Erasmus had 
created.
In the end, the pressures of the Reformation would pull 
Erasmus and More apart, and force both of them to change 
their stances on central issues. But Utopia and The Praise of Folly 
remain, as challenging and as baffling as ever: monuments to 
a deep meeting of minds, at a time when scholars hoped that 
they could change the world.
Anthony Grafton

[ xxiii ]
Acknowledgments 
0 
THE THREE ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS OF THE 
Praise of Folly available to me, I have made 
most use of that by John Wilson, first pub-
lished in 1668 and reprinted in 1913 by the 
Oxford University Press, with alterations and 
an Introduction by Mrs. P. S. Allen. The translation by 
Sir Thomas Chaloner (1549) is a pleasure to read, but 
only if one appreciates pre-Elizabethan language and is 
not discouraged by rather inchoate sentences. The version 
by White Kennett (1683), which has been often reprinted, 
usually without the translator's name, is quite untrust-
worthy, though it corrects Wilson in a few places and dis-
plays a highly readable style. A kind of debt I may owe 
to Kennett-and if a debt at all, then a great one; for it 
was the badness of his translation which impelled me to 
undertake my own. The version by James Copner (1878) 
I have not seen. F. M. Nichols translated the prefatory 
letter to More and a part of Section 33 in The Epistles of 
Erasmus ( 1904), Vol. II. I have made some use of the 
French rendering by J. Nisard, as published in 1842. 
For the Latin text I have trusted (with two or three slight 
exceptions) the LeClerc edition of Erasmus, Opera Omnia, 
Vol. VI (Leyden, 1703). 
My introductory essay owes something to Mrs. Allen 
and more to Dr. Craig Thompson of Cornell University, 
whose Princeton University doctoral dissertation, Lucian 
in the English Renaissance, underlies my discussion of the 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Lucianic elements in this book. Dr. Thompson is prepar-
ing a new edition of Bailey's version of the Colloquies, a 
work which will please everyone who reads Erasmus in 
English. Professor T. S. K. Scott-Craig of Hobart College, 
an approved Erasmian, gave me a number of suggestions. 
My colleague, Professor Paul Coleman-Norton, has 
assisted me with puzzling passages in the Latin. For the 
quotation from Aristotle's Rhetoric in my essay I draw 
upon the translation by Professor Lane Cooper. 
This, I sincerely hope, is Erasmus's book. The only jus-
tification for a new version is that the others represent 
Erasmus, to a modern reader, less adequately than is de-
sirable or possible. Since it is his, I do not dedicate it; but 
my labors upon it may be inscribed: Ad laudem uxoris 
meae duumque filiorum nostrorum, qui stultitiam meam toler-
averunt, riserunt, atque interdum (Deo gratias) participaverunt. 
H. H. H. 
Princeton, New Jersey 

[ xxv ]
The Folly of Erasmus 
T
HROUGH MORE THAN FOUR CENTURIES THE 
world has found this book useful. As with so 
many good things, those who have had most 
need for it have failed to use it. But as also 
with many great books, beyond its audience 
of readers has extended a wide fringe of influence, within 
which have stood the many who have known that such a 
book existed, have known, too, that there was something 
electric in it and that its author transmitted through it, as 
he did through other of his labors, a spirit whose working 
sends our minds at once to the parable of the Gospels: 
Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God? It is like 
leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures 
of meal, till the whole was leavened. 
Yet while this points to the subtle nature of the Erasmian 
force, and to its manner of diffusion, this gives no account 
of its direction or content, unless we make bold to press 
the citation and associate the spirit in question with the 
kingdom of the parable. We can say, with understate-
ment, that Erasmus is not far from the kingdom; yet to 
define this last has perplexed our divines. We may hope, 
with Erasmus, that it is one of the mysteries revealed to 
the simple and foolish. 
Cataloguers put The Praise of Folly on the shelf of satire, 
and with reason; yet we do wrong to make this classifica-
tion too casually or too absolutely. Satire is directed at an 
object, or at objects, within the actual view of the satirist. 

[ xxvi ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
Thus Erasmus makes ridiculous the dishonest and irre-
ligious monks who infested some of the orders. He at-
tacks, both by analysis and by parody, the methods of 
Biblical interpretation used by scholastics, or by inter-
preters without Greek or Hebrew. But the vitality of the 
book does not lie in these jibes or attacks. It owes far more 
to the comprehensive irony which informs these and 
other passages where he is pleading, ever so obliquely, for 
tolerance, for an understanding of human nature, for 
light on the dark areas of man's world. If the book were, 
as some have seemed to consider it, an unbroken series of 
satirical comments, unless it had a positive spirit greater 
than the keenness or deftness or disinfectant power of 
these, we could not read it at this late time with edifica-
tion. 
The point seems to be that satirists rarely destroy or 
appreciably correct the obliquities they attack. If they 
did, their works would be dull reading indeed. And why 
should satirists of our time still be shooting at the butts 
used by Aristophanes, Juvenal, Lucian, and Cervantes? 
A satirist may succeed in making a person ridiculous, but 
that is a narrow success which gives him no great claim 
upon the regard of mankind, particularly of posterity. 
The real power of great satirists is positive rather than 
negative. They attract, if at all, by some steady light 
which burns in them, a light that is benevolent and grate-
ful to the reader-yes, even in Swift, where the style 
surely rests and invites the spirit as well as the eye. Swift 
has much humor, as well-another blessing without bit-
terness. The great satirist lifts the reader to his own plane 
of clear vision, and wins confidence by reposing in the 

[ xxvii ]
SATIRE AND CRITICISM 
reader confidence that this vision will be shared. Good 
satire is an intrigue among honest men, a conspiracy of 
the candid. But intriguing and conspiring, with a little 
change of scale, become statesmanship. To return, then, 
the spirit of Erasmus shows itself in its full power not in 
overt or direct satire, but rather in overlays of irony and 
in the positive drive of the whole construction of this 
eloquent, humane, and finely concatenated speech put 
in the mouth of Folly. When it is added up, the sum may 
as well be called criticism as satire. Mary Colum has 
lately said of criticism that "as an intellectual force it rep-
resents a principle through which the world of ideas re-
news itself, which prunes and trims old ideas to satisfy 
new ideas and aspirations." Does not The Praise of Folly 
do just this? It is not an irrelevance to notice that this 
book had been circulating for eighty years in Latin and 
forty years in English when Shakespeare began to write. 
Mrs. Colum goes on: "Purely literary criticism ... 
represents, in the work of its highest practitioners, that 
branch of literature whose most important office is the 
originating of ideas, the discovery of the circumstances, 
the foreseeing of the lines that other branches of literature 
follow." Erasmus does not do all this, and certainly he is 
not writing purely literary criticism. And yet-there is an 
old "critical problem" concerning the relation of art and 
morality, or of art and truth, though the shorter and 
uglier word may change the problem somewhat. Re-
cently the question has involved art and propaganda; and 
critics have sought to dissociate the two, to justify or to 
condemn their copresence, to set up art as pure form, or 
to transcend the distinction in some other way. In The 

[ xxviii ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
Praise of Folly, one might say, Erasmus did not consider 
this or any related question. Yet he contributed to 
thought upon the subject and helped determine the prac-
tice of the sixteenth and of later centuries. With him the 
problem took the form of the relation of classical art, 
classical poetry and mythology in particular, to the Chris-
tian doctrine and life. Can anyone who reads this book 
doubt where he stands? Yet he never talks about the mat-
ter except to make fun, in good Lucianic fashion, of "the 
gods of the poets," to utter burlesque invocations to the 
Muses, to speak of Horace (in Horace's own words, to be 
sure) as "that fat sleek hog from the sty of Epicurus," to 
call Homer "the father of nonsense," and to quote him in 
very trivial connections. He was revealing, not stating, 
that poetry may be read and enjoyed without being 
treated either as an insidious intoxicant or as the vehicle 
of sacrosanct wisdom, and that the better a person knows 
poetry the more fun he can have with it. The reader is 
aware, long before laying down the book, that Erasmus 
cares deeply for classical poetry, and that he believes a 
Christian will be better off for knowing Greek-though 
he also believes that among unlettered folk will be found 
some of the best and most admirable Christians. Since 
both beliefs appear to be borne out by observation, Eras-
mus may not have been wrong, though the flat statement 
sounds paradoxical. 
How did this subtle and complex construction come in-
to being? Let us begin with the document. Mwp{a.; 
EyKwftLOP, Erasmus's own title for it, became in Latin-
ized Greek M oriae Encomium, and in Latin Stultitiae Laus .. 
It would have been more accurate and informing if our 
early translators had closely followed the Greek and had 

[ xxix ]
A TRUE EULOGY 
brought the book into English as "Folly's Eulogy," or 
"The Panegyric of Folly." An encomium (or encomion) 
is a eulogy or panegyric, a species of the genus oration. It 
is a set speech giving and asking praise of its subject, and 
in the orthodox tradition of serious rhetoric its subject is 
a person, living or dead. A rhetorical game grew up, as 
we may learn from Erasmus himself, in which one might 
compose a eulogy of one of the gods, of a character in 
Homer, or even of the ass; one might pronounce a pane-
gyric upon baldness, or write in praise of darkness, or of 
nothing. Erasmus also refers to this work as a "declama-
tion," another rhetorical term, with the special suggestion 
that the speech was thought of as an academic one, or as 
a "show piece," for no particular occasion. Since the 
audience is once addressed as Viri, and the speaker is 
wearing an academic gown, we are led to think that 
Erasmus had in mind a gathering in a college hall, before 
which a "senior sophister," or even a distinguished visit-
ing scholar, might well appear with a learned declama-
tion. 
The topics for composing a eulogy upon a man were 
set forth in the standard books of instruction for speakers 
and writers, beginning with Aristotle's Rhetoric. The doc-
trine was that the speaker should begin with a man's an-
cestry and family, and find something notable there; 
perhaps even the country or city of his birth would lend 
evidence of his merit; his upbringing and education 
would be canvassed for similar evidence; and then one 
passed on to his achievements, his virtues, his public 
honors, and so on. Somewhere along the line, the speaker 
might magnify the man's friends and associates, or the 
people who served him, in order to borrow thence some 

[ xxx ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
glory. Each circumstance was not only mentioned but 
also amplified-aggravated, if you like. Thus if a man was 
descended from kings or nobles, of course he partook of 
their noble and royal qualities; if he came of humble 
stock, his own virtue was the greater for having climbed 
above the common run without the advantage of high 
birth. If one eulogized, as a jeu d' esprit, such a thing as 
mud (and Luti Encomium by M. Antonius Majoragius is 
extant), one might treat the matter of parentage fanci-
fully, saying that the parents of mud are those two most 
serviceable and ancient of all creatures, water and earth. 
All of this lore, the reader of The Praise of Folly finds, was 
known to Erasmus and put to use by Folly. 
There are other traditions lying back of the book and 
flowing through it to modern times. They belong in our 
picture, however briefly they must be dismissed here. One 
is the tradition of"foolliterature," of which the great sea-
mark is the Narrenschijf-"Ship of Fools"-which Sebas-
tian Brant, a Strasburg inn-keeper's son who had become 
a learned lawyer, composed in his native Swabian dialect 
and published in 1494. In easy verses Brant characterizes 
112 kinds of fools who journeyed aboard his imagined 
ship. Narrenschijfbecame Stultifera Navis when it was trans-
lated into Latin in 1497, and thus it circulated widely 
through Europe. Then Badius Ascensius, a Flemish 
friend of Erasmus's, believing that Brant had not allowed 
enough women on board his boat, wrote an enlarged ver-
sion, with six more ships provided for female fools. This 
work by Badius was in Latin, but it was translated into 
French at once by a translator who further enlarged it. 
And so it went. Narrenschijf came to people who could 
read only English in two versions published in the same 

[ xxxi ]
BRANT WIDELY READ 
year, 1509. One, a prose rendering of the French enlarge-
ment of Badius's translation and enlargement of Brant, 
was made by a young man named Henry Watson. The 
other, more successful and more widely read, was Alex-
ander Barclay's Ship of Folys of the World, "translated out 
of Laten, Frenche and Doche." This is rhymed in very 
halting verses and stanzas, and by its author's own 
avowal keeps no close adherence to any of his several 
originals. Barclay had discovered some fools in England 
who fell under none of the many classes described by 
Continental authorities upon the subject. 
At any rate, it is interesting to remember that while 
Erasmus, who knew his Brant in Latin and perhaps in 
one or two other tongues as well, rode over the Alps from 
Italy, meditating upon folly, and while at the house of 
Thomas More, suffering from lumbago, he wrote out the 
fruits of his meditation, Henry Watson and Alexander 
Barclay were also engrossed with their own compilations 
upon the same subject. The presses of Henry Pynson and 
Wynkyn de Worde in London were thumping, proof was 
being read, printers were justifying forms and hanging 
up freshly-printed sheets to dry-all occupied with folly. 
Erasmus's own book was put into type two years later, 
1511, and captivated literate Europe. 
A still more important influence in shaping this book 
was a favorite author of Erasmus's, Lucian. We need learn 
no other names for this great humorist, since he has come 
down as plain Lucian, though sometimes given the addi-
tion, "of Samasota," the town on the Euphrates river 
where he was born. He was a Syrian of late Rome, dying 
about A.D. 200, and so much the cosmopolitan that he 
seems never to have stayed long in one place, but knew 

[ xxxii ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
the cities of Asia Minor, Greece, Italy, Egypt, and even 
Gaul. He left some eighty-five works in Greek prose, 
mostly short and in the form of eulogies, lectures, mono-
logues, essays, narratives, and, above all, dialogues. The 
world knows best his Dialogues of the Gods, Dialogues of 
Courtesans, and Dialogues of the Dead; and possibly with 
these should be named his True History, an account of his 
travels "from the Pillars of Hercules into the Western 
Ocean," including a visit to Elysium and conversations 
with the shades of philosophers and heroes, the whole a 
parody of the old historians, travel-writers, and poets. 
Lucian also wrote the story of the golden ass, which we 
know better in the telling of Apuleius, his contemporary. 
Almost every sort of literary treatment except the ortho-
dox poetic one of idealized representation we find in 
Lucian. From what is nowadays called "stark realism" 
through scurrility, irony, burlesque, parody, satire, the 
mock-heroic, to fantasy, here is God's plenty. 
Lucian was a favorite with men of the Renaissance, and 
six of his dialogues had been put into type at Rome in or 
by 1472. There were thirty-five publications of parts of 
his work, either in the original or translated into Latin, 
before 1500. Aldus issued his Opera at Venice in 1503, 
with a title-page bearing four lines in Greek, "Lucian to 
his Book," which have been translated thus: 
These are the works of Lucian, who knew that folly 
is of ancient birth, and that what seems wise to some 
men appears ridiculous to others; there is no common 
judgment in men, but what you admire others will 
laugh at. 
These are sentiments we find expressed also by Erasmus's 
Folly. By 1505 Erasmus and Thomas More, who may 

[ xxxiii ]
ERASMUS AS LUCIANIST 
have discovered this author before Erasmus did, were at 
work translating dialogues by Lucian into Latin, and 
thirty-two of their versions (of which twenty-eight were 
by Erasmus) were printed by Badius in Paris, 1506. On 
the title-page of this work by an ancient scoffer it was re-
corded that the translator was nuper sacri theologiae laurea 
decorato, that is, Erasmus had "recently been honored 
with the degree of Doctor of Sacred Theology" by the 
University of Turin. 
Later Erasmus was to publish translations of seven 
more pieces by Lucian, and to write his own colloquies, 
some of which follow closely the models set by the old 
Syrian. But enough has been said, though more is avail-
able, to prove him a Lucianist. Some years after he had 
published The Praise of Folly he wrote to a friend that it 
was Thomas More's fondness for wit and fun, "and es-
pecially for Lucian," that prompted him to write this 
book. The early part is Lucianic in its scoffing at the gods 
of mythology; and farther on Erasmus borrows from 
Lucian the view of the world as seen from heaven or from 
a great height, the world compared t.o a stage, and other 
devices. The reader who has not had time for Lucian may 
yet encounter here, and probably enjoy, the Lucianic 
irony. It is less obviously benevolent than Socratic irony. 
It is likely to hold itself, as well as other things, lightly. It 
cuts more than one way. The reader may also catch some-
thing of Lucian's bounteous fluency, his comprehensive-
ness, by virtue of which he seems to be driving several 
horses at once, but seems also to miss nothing of the land-
scape or the crowd through which he drives. He is likely 
to be joking or emitting puns to boot. This quality we 

[ xxxiv ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
know better, perhaps, in Rabelais, who was both a Lu-
cianist and an Erasmian. 
From all the Lucianic bounty we might single out one 
somewhat submerged detail, which we may call "learned 
parody." Not in Lucian alone, but everywhere in the 
body of classical and modern literature, we find fun gen-
erated out of the very modes and techniques of learning 
itself. This fun cannot be made by one who is himself in-
nocent of scholarship. It is no game for either the plain, 
blunt man or the literary dilettante. The audience, too, 
must have had some converse with the learned world. 
The author must have gone far enough in some discipline 
to handle easily the technical terms and to pursue the most 
highly approved methods, even though he intends to pur-
sue them ad absurdum as rapidly as possible. Some begin-
ning of this kind of thing we find in Aristophanes; another 
sort of beginning we find among the Sophists, but they 
sought admiration rather than amusement or satire when 
they composed elaborate and closely-knit arguments in 
support of paradoxes, or worse. They could "make the 
worse appear the better cause" and were proud to show 
off their ability. Readers of Plato's Phaedrus have encoun-
tered tours de force of this kind. Then through the mock-
eulogies we have spoken of, and Lucianic burlesque, we 
arrive at the learned parody of the Renaissance in such a 
work as The Praise of Folly or The Epistles of Obscure Men 
(1516-17), though this last uses other modes as well and 
is by way of being a hoax. From a later age we get that 
excellent specimen, The Art of Sinking (1728) by Pope or by 
Pope and his friends. Even Lamb's "Dissertation upon 
Roast Pig" partakes of this tradition. 

[ xxxv ]
INVOLUTED PARODY 
One device which cannot be dissociated from learned 
parody is the turning of a method or practice against it-
l!elf. Thus Bishop John Jewel, the chief ornament of the 
English church before Hooker, as a young university lec-
turer composed and delivered an oration against rhetoric 
in which he exemplified rhetorical figures and modes in 
the course of ridiculing their use. Ben Jonson wrote "A 
Fit of Rhyme against Rhyme." We find this device in 
Erasmus, of course. Early in the eulogy he begins sprin-
kling in Greek words and phrases, and continues doing so 
to the end. But also early in it he singles out as one ofthe 
bad habits of modern rhetoricians this sprinkling of Greek 
words and phrases in their Latin compositions; he admits 
that he copies them. They do so, he says, to show that 
they are bilingual-a distinction shared by the horse-
leech. They also seek to confuse and overawe their readers. 
Then he goes on with the practice. He scoffs at modern 
authors for using cryptic words, usually in a foreign 
tongue, as tides of their books; yet his own book bears 
two words of Greek as a tide. But an account of all his de-
vices of learned parody would summarize much of the 
book; and the topic leads to larger considerations of 
scholarly self-consciousness and self-criticism which be-
long with our final estimate of the Erasmian spirit. 
A closer study of what literature Erasmus had freshly 
in mind when Folly began speaking would bring us to 
Aristophanes and Horace. The running battle she main-
tains with the Stoics had a model in Horace's satires and 
epistles. Much of the middle third of The Praise of Folly 
seems to have_ been suggested by Satire II, iii, which Pope 
later drew upon. The perfect wise man of the Stoics (Sec., 
tion 14) appears briefly at the end of Horace's first 

[ xxxvi ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
epistle. These details we cannot pursue. As an influence 
of a different sort, however, we must mention Erasmus's 
interest in the verities of Christian doctrine, his belief 
that the church had fallen away from the mind of its 
founder and early apostles. With this zeal for what he 
called "the philosophy of Christ" went an acceptance, in 
some measure, of the Christianized Platonism which had 
been arrived at by some of the Italian thinkers of the pre-
ceding generation. These modes of thought and feeling 
had already manifested themselves in England, to bear 
fruit especially in the teaching and preaching of John 
Colet, Dean of St. Paul's, whom both Erasmus and More 
admired. Thus as he rode from Italy and thought about 
England, it was not folly alone that engaged his mind, or 
his happy remembrance of the facetious Thomas More; 
it was also his deepest fears and hopes, his most serious 
thoughts, and greatest admirations, connected with re-
ligion and learning. 
Let us get back to the document. Folly appears in the 
pulpit, a young woman, as Holbein saw her, fresh and 
piquant. She wears the gown of a scholar but her own 
cap, which has two long peaks so placed and shaped as to 
suggest that they are designed to cover ass's ears, and 
each ending in a knob-the bells of the jester. She begins 
a eulogy of herself, complaining at the ingratitude which 
men have shown; for while they have eulogized trivial 
objects and bad men, not one has had the grace to eulo-
gize Folly, to whom they owe so much. Well, blow your 
own horn, she says, if no one will blow it for you. She 
knows she is good. Every circumstance-her parentage, 
her birthplace, her companions, the effects of her pres-
ence, the sorry spectacle of the wise men who shun her, 

[ xxxvii ]
FOLLY'S TRICKS 
the happiness of fools, the power she wields-everything 
conduces to enhance her attractions and magnify her 
greatness. She turns to show how different classes of men, 
and all women, depend upon folly for their happiness. 
The reader is swept along. He has seen something of the 
follies of the world, and recognizes the portraits. This is not 
mere fooling. Again and again Folly scores a palpable hit. 
One has an uneasy consciousness, to be sure, that she is 
breaking the rules. She takes special advantage of the fact 
that some words have two or more meanings; and when 
they do not have two meanings, in the stricter sense, they 
have two or more sets of connotations, and Folly knows 
how to skip among these, cutting across lots and leaving 
heads in a whirl. "There's nothing either good or bad, 
but thinking makes it so." Folly said it before Shake-
speare, in her own way; she said that there is no truth of 
things, but only opinions about them. Aristotle had 
gravely set down in his Rhetoric this advice to the eulogist: 
For the purposes of praise or blame, the speaker may 
identify a man's actual qualities with qualities border-
ing on them. Thus a cautious man may be represented 
as cold and designing, a simpleton as good-natured, a 
callous man as easy-going. And so in each case we may 
substitute one of the collateral terms, always leaning 
toward the best; terming the choleric and passionate 
man, for instance, a plain-dealer, and the arrogant man 
superb and dignified. • . . Thus the rash man may be 
described as courageous, and the spendthrift as liberal; 
for so it will seem to the crowd, and meanwhile a false 
inference can be drawn from the man's motive. 
Folly knows this device, whether to use it or to expose it. 
The proverbs of the folk are at her tongue's end, and all 
seem to favor her. She also knows the approved method 

[ xxxviii ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
of literary and Biblical exegesis. Homer, Horace, and 
Cicero are on her side. But lest among Christians these 
authors have no credit, she also shows from Holy Writ 
that folly is honorable. Solomon and St. Paul are her best 
witnesses. David, Jeremiah, and Ecclesiasticus have 
dropped expressions which she can interpret to her pur-
pose. Even our Lord seemed to favor the simple as against 
those the world calls wise. His followers are not ashamed 
to be called sheep, and the constant practice of the Holy 
Scriptures is to draw metaphors from the more innocent 
and perhaps more foolish animals. 
Along with her equivocations, her absurdities, her high 
selectivity, Folly offers much that is straight satire of what 
the reader is glad to see satirized. Worse than this, more 
disturbing, that is, to one who is under the illusion that 
the book is thejeu d'esprit it pretends to be, Folly again and 
again talks the soundest of sense or shows a flash of poetic 
insight that goes beyond what even the best of good sense 
can ordinarily compass. The power of illusion to enhance 
daily life, the strength of meekness and the beauty of 
humility, the sadness of the human lot-these are realized 
in symbols or illuminated by an oblique light. As with 
other great books, this seems to be many books. Carlyle's 
"clothes philosophy" is here. Strip the clothes from the 
actors, says Folly, and there will be no play. See the con-
tradiction between the king's clothes, crown, and sceptre, 
and the man whom they disguise. Thackeray's Book of 
Snobs is suggested, as is Bunyan's picture of Vanity Fair. 
Pope's clear assertion of man's duty to remain in his sta-
tion and to study what is proper to him is here also. The 
animals are happy, says Folly, because each follows his 
proper nature; man alone attempts the preposterous. 

[ xxxix ]
INCONSISTENCY OF FOLLY 
Mark Twain's "poor damned human race" is very much 
here. Sir William Temple wrote a good sentence: "When 
all is done, humane life is, at the greatest and the best, but 
like a froward child, that must be played with and 
humoured a little to keep it quiet, till it falls asleep, and 
then the care is over." Folly said as much in several ways, 
and at times with almost the same cadence. Something of 
Rabelais is in the book; something of Swift. "The man 
from Mars," who sees life on earth clearly and speaks the 
inconvenient truth about it, is here; Folly calls him "a 
man dropped down from the sky." The method of De-
foe's Shortest Way with Dissenters is the method of Folly, or 
at least of Erasmus. We have, in a word, a compendium 
of satires and comedies, with no one of them developed at 
full length. 
Not even the figure of Folly is consistently or clearly 
imagined. An author who was more of a poet than Eras-
mus would have given her at once more depth, definition, 
and integrity. As one scholar has observed, in the early 
part of the speech she seems to be the wicked folly of 
Christian and Hebrew morality; farther on she embodies 
a conception gained from the good-natured but shrewd 
fool of the courts; and finally (though not in the perora-
tion) she becomes Christian folly, a conception having 
kinship with the tradition and doctrine of St. Francis of 
Assisi. Holbein's rosy demoiselle is an inadequate figure, 
and could not possibly have delivered this speech. Inter-
estingly enough, the engraver for the Leyden edition 
(1703) changed the face and figure, making Folly middle-
aged and somewhat battered in appearance. We may 
know a great deal about folly when we finish the book, 
but we should not recognize Folly if we met her on the 

[ xl ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
street. Many a reader, too, has gone over The Praise of 
Folly in an edition without Holbein's sketches and has 
never even pictured the goddess at the desk or the fools 
gaping at her discourse. Translators have blurred the 
small amount of dramatic circumstance which is pro-
vided. And while a feigned speech is as much a piece of 
fiction as any other feigned action, a book like this, which 
is nothing but a speech, can hardly be completely poetic. 
That it is a public address, constructed on obvious rhe-
torical lines, harms it as a poetic or fictional creation. 
"Dramatic monologues" as poets write them give more 
of the interior of their speakers, and take their form, too, 
from an inner necessity of character and its expression. 
Yet although Erasmu11 was an imperfect dramatist, he 
was, as has been suggested, a great critic. The mordant 
power of this book is his own, elevated and caught at the 
top of its form. With all his faults, his cowardice, some 
would say, and his exhibitions of pettiness-but these are 
not so many as the phrase suggests-Erasmus seems to 
have maintained a consistency in his work and life, so 
that these join to display a spirit which has given heart 
and hope to his colleagues in scholarship, to all the liberal-
minded, in fact, in all countries and in all times since his 
own. One who does no more than read this one little book 
of his finds that broad statement credible. Yet it is an easy 
book to misread. And one leading suggestion of the pages 
which follow is that while The Praise of Folly is an authen-
tic expression of the essential Erasmian spirit, we do 
wrong to take Folly herself as the author's accredited 
representative, except in a few passages-and in those he 
rather forgets that Folly is speaking. 

[ xli ]
A PROBLEM IN READING 
To make clearer this apparently confused view is. a nice 
problem in literary interpretation. We may be helped by 
analyzing another, more familiar, problem in the same 
field. Consider the farewell speech of Polonius to Laertes 
in Hamlet-the "few precepts" which the young man go-
ing away to the University is to remember. "Be thou 
familiar, but by no means vulgar." "Give every man 
thine ear, but few thy voice." ''Neither a borrower nor a 
lender be." And so on, up to this pitch: 
This above all: to thine own self be true; 
And it must follow, as the night the day, 
Thou canst not then be false to any man. 
This has been read by millions, and the reading of it, or 
the effect of it, has varied considerably. Let us suppose 
that one reader believes that good literature is full of well-
phrased sentiments which may be of profit to life and 
conduct. He will take the speech much as we imagine 
Polonius hoped Laertes would take it. He believes it, in 
other words, partly because it sounds like good sense, 
partly because the spectacle of an aged father saying fare-
well to his son breaks down or prevents resistance to be-
lief, partly because, knowing Shakespeare to be a great 
author, the reader infers that what he writes in the form 
of direct advice will be sound. This reader may even go 
so far as to quote the concluding three lines in moral ex-
hortations. In general, he ignores entirely the dramatic 
form of Hamlet; if he is conscious of it, he may take the 
position that even a character in a play may express val-
uable truths. 
For our second reader, let us take one at an opposite 
extreme. This one knows something about Shakespeare 
and the history of the stage and of literature. He judges, 

[ xlii ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
from other circumstances of the play, that Shakespeare 
did not intend Polonius to seem wise or prudent but 
rather as senile and slightly foolish. Hamlet himself seems 
to take this view. This reader knows that Shakespeare 
frequently parodied or satirized common literary or 
dramatic conventions. In Midsummer Night's Dream he 
burlesqued plays put on by groups of tradesmen. So this 
reader decides that here Shakespeare is making fun of 
the whole matter of a father's advice to his son, and he 
reads Polonius's speech as a parody on such farewell 
speeches, but one which might well have been produced 
by such a doting old gaffer as Polonius. He does not be-
lieve the speech at all, but he believes it is consistent with 
the character of Polonius and with the purpose of the 
dramatist. This is a highly sophisticated reading, just as 
the first reader's was a naive one. 
A third reader may also find the speech proper to the 
character of Polonius, but he may judge that since the 
speaker is represented as being the principal counsellor 
of the king of Denmark and with much experience of life, 
he is not altogether a fool; his speech will show some 
shrewdness, some worldly wisdom, some pompousness 
and windiness, perhaps; but it is by no means a burlesque 
of such things. This interpreter will not take it seriously 
as a guide of life, though he may find sayings in it which 
seem to hit off with great exactness what appear to be 
sound rules of conduct. This reader is sophisticated also, 
but in this interpretation he might be called primarily 
reasonable. 
Yet it is possible to conceive of a reader who stands on 
another level of reading entirely, a level on which the 
attitude toward this particular speech becomes a very 

[ xliii ]
A CONCRETE READING 
minor matter. We might call the interpretation at this 
level a concrete one, by way of distinguishing it from all 
the others, which alike tended to be abstract. Our fourth 
reader (though any other, by grace or discipline, may 
also stand on this level) is likely not to give any interpre-
tation to this particular speech except while he reads, or 
just after he reads, the entire play. He finds the whole not 
only more important than the parts, but also more ab-
sorbing. He arrives at his conception of the whole, you 
may say, by reading or hearing the parts, perhaps also by 
the use of much commentary and analysis. Even so, once 
the conception is present, his reading of any particular 
speech is always tangential to or conditional upon it. It 
is not merely an intellectual structure, to be diagrammed 
and fixed, but it is experiential. That is the reason he 
wishes to go over the whole before discussing this speech. 
Sophistication, or the control of attitudes by a purposive 
manipulation of somewhat isolated pieces of knowledge, 
gives way to imagination, which works to fuse all ex-
perience-even the experience of being sophisticated and 
that of being reasonable-into a unity. Our reader sees 
the play, it must be, as a world, a universe, to be entered. 
Much as he may like to enter it, he cannot very well 
carry pieces out of it. Of what we ordinarily call the uni-
verse, whose form and limits, whose oneness, even, we 
cannot see, we usually say that we might understand the 
whole if we could fully understand a single object in it. 
Yet this would be true only if we had a sense of the whole, 
or of wholeness, to begin with. The world given us in a 
poetic work has the great advantage that it presents this 
sense of wholeness vividly. Just how particular persons 
who read concretely would interpret Polonius's speech, 

[ xliv ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
these brief remarks do not divulge. To go on in this direc-
tion would be to write an essay on Hamlet. 
The example serves to show varieties and levels of in-
terpretation. Remembering that The Praise of Folly is not 
a consummated poetic fiction, we cannot look to it for a 
world of its own; yet an interesting analogy will appear, 
and here also we must strive toward a concrete reading. 
Some keys to interpretation are plainly inadequate. This 
might be suggested, for instance: since Erasmus puts his 
discourse in the mouth of Folly, he intends it all to be fool-
ishness; none of it is to be taken seriously, except as a 
dramatic presentation of what is foolish. This would in-
deed result in a naive reading, and anyone capable of 
reading the book at all finds at once that the key does not 
fit. There is almost no straight or mere foolishness in it. 
Folly may be arguing that as a baby she was better off 
than was Jupiter as a baby, for he was nursed by a she-
goat, whereas she was nursed by two lovely nymphs, 
Drunkenness and Idleness; but she presents this in beauti-
fully correct sentences in its exact place in a well-planned 
progression. Farther along, when she tells the duties of a 
king and the dangers of his position, she talks as gravely 
as any philosopher. We look for a better key. We know 
the proverb, as does Folly, "Children and fools sometimes 
speak the truth." This suggests that while there will be 
nonsense in the oration, there will be flashes of wisdom, 
much as we find in the parts of the fools in Shakespeare. 
There are such flashes, but the whole is not to be de-
scribed in this manner. There are wholly grave sections 
of considerable length, suggesting Shakespeare's kings 
and counsellors rather than his fools. There is learned 
parody, and serious Biblical criticism. Above all, there is 

[ xlv ]
PARTIAL READINGS 
a beautiful orderliness and a rising movement quite in-
consistent with mere deviation into sense. 
Folly herself offers another help toward our interpreta-
tion. Referring (in Section 13) to Plato's Symposium, she 
recalls that Alcibiades drew an analogy from the little 
images of Silenus current at the time, which were ugly 
when looked at, but which, when opened, were found to 
contain beautifully carved images of the gods. Folly tells 
us that we must not be content with the appearances of 
things but must look for the true interior meaning. (This 
is inconsistent with what she says elsewhere about the 
supremacy of opinion, but let that pass.) Pressing this 
suggestion to the limit, we might be led to say that Eras-
mus intends Folly really to represent Wisdom. The non-
sense or fooling she indulges in, then, is but superficial 
disguise or a relish, a kind of unbending proper to a wise 
person. Folly thus becomes a completely "sympathetic" 
figure, and she has sometimes been so interpreted. Such 
a key seems more serviceable, indeed, than the others we 
have tried. Falstaff is a complex character whom we view 
with mingled emotions but whom, on the whole, we may 
find sympathetic. We might similarly overlook the incon-
sistencies of Folly, her suppression of facts-for she rarely 
dwells upon the consequences of folly-and her defense 
of bad causes, for the sake of her hatred of pretense, her 
occasional sweet reasonableness, and her broad sym-
pathies. The main difficulties with the view are that it 
claims for Folly a consistency which, as has been pointed 
out, does not exist, and for Erasmus a power of dramatic 
conception which was denied him. Were Folly really in-
tegrated into a character such as this view calls for, she 
would stand with the few great figures of comic creation 

[ xlvi ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
in the world's literature. In her own right, as character, 
she does not so stand. At times she seems to be on the way 
to become a character; but usually she is a puppet, and 
at times is forgotten completely by author and reader. So 
we come back to a divergence between Folly and the 
book, or between Folly and the author, and say that a 
concrete reading will involve Erasmus as well as Folly, 
and even more than Folly. 
Both in the author's preface to Thomas More and in 
the declamation we find stress laid upon the notion that 
only fools have the privilege of speaking truth without 
offense. This observation, if dwelt upon, does cut deep 
into the motives and methods of Erasmus. He has found 
a device whereby he may say what he wishes to say, speak 
the truth as he sees it, and still plead immunity. Yet he 
cannot speak this truth all of the time, or no one will be-
lieve it is Folly who is before him. Following this lead, we 
do well to think of irony. The very writing and issuance 
of this book was an act of irony on the part of an eminent 
scholar. He was playfully ironical in connecting it as he 
did with Thomas More. He was ironical in another way 
when he said that some people hope to become rich by 
praying to Erasmus. He was ironical in still another way 
when he ridiculed the foolish love of fame which keeps 
scholars at their labors. 
Suppose we now premise that Erasmus wishes to show 
that what is usually accepted as wisdom is not very wise. 
He will do so by placing much of it in the mouth of Folly; 
but along with this he will put other sentiments which 
are either below or above the level of ordinary wisdom-
for to mundane common sense, what goes beyond or 
above itself is sheer folly, no less than what falls short of 

[ xlvii ]
ERASMUS MANIPULATES FOLLY 
it. The sentiments below the ordinary level will serve to 
authenticate the speaker as Folly, will provide mirth, and 
will have a cajoling effect upon the reader, tending to 
break down categorical boundaries in his mind and to 
leave him unguarded against other kinds of attack. Sen-
timents above the ordinary level will be so played up as 
to emphasize the mediocre nature of worldly wisdom, 
and will be insinuated into the reader's mind with a 
novel attractiveness. There is something of an argument 
a fortiori here: if Folly can be as wise as this, what ought 
wisdom be? Or put more ironically, what men will not 
accept from the Evangelists and the apostles they will 
perhaps accept from Folly. We have a key which seems to 
operate throughout our reading of the eulogy, most of 
which can be arranged under a scheme based upon this 
explanation. There will be eddies within the main cur-
rent, as when Folly herself uses the device of irony with a 
basis, or fulcrum, in either her own foolishness or her own 
wisdom, distinguishable from the basis of Erasmus him-
self. Other eddies will result from mere play of fancy. Yet 
something is still left over, unexplained by this key, too-
principally the gusto, abandon, and joyous release which 
supply so much of the book's appeal, and perhaps a great 
part of its real message. The experience of a concrete 
reading will include the impact of energies as well as the 
shifting of attitudes and the savor of various kinds of wis-
dom. 
It is time to look again at the document. An interesting 
passage (Section 17) argues that halfwits and "naturals" 
such as kings and noblemen used to employ as jesters are 
really the happiest of men. They are free, says Folly, from 
tortures of conscience and from fear of death. They play 

[ xlviii ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
all of the time, and laugh a great deal. Every man, even 
the coldest, has a soft spot in his heart for these poor souls 
-except that we must not call them "poor"; Folly does 
not, but paints them as rich and fortunate. Her position 
does not represent the wisdom of the world, which may 
be indulgent toward these innocents but certainly reckons 
them among the unfortunate. Is what Folly says, then, 
something less than the wisdom of the world, or more? 
Taken as a bare argument, it is less. Such halfwits and 
imbeciles, as Erasmus must have known, have miseries 
too deep for telling. Even the best of men (such as Thomas 
More, who had a great liking for natural fools and kept 
one in his household), though they may be amused or 
interested by the spectacle of such people, are likely at 
the same time to feel a kind of pity so deep as to be pain-
ful. Others feel mere revulsion. The argument Folly 
makes, in a word, ignores important facts. But suppose 
we think of it as being the vehicle for something else, a 
plea for a sympathetic and understanding attitude 
toward these unfortunates. Then, we might say, the pas-
sage rises above worldly wisdom. It owes something to 
an old identification of harmless insanity with a sort of 
possession by divine force. J;lut there is a tenderness in it, 
such as reminds us of Pope's verses about the poor Indian. 
Erasmus may be saying what may need to be said, that 
these dim-sighted souls are human souls and belong with-
in the range of human as well as divine love. "Mter a life 
lived out in much jollity," he writes of the halfwits, "with 
no fear of death, or sense of it, they go straight to the 
Elysian fields, there to entertain the pious and idle shades 
with their jests." Erasmus reminds us elsewhere, too, that 

[ xlix ]
THE SCHOLAR AS FOOL 
we are all touched, or liable to be touched, by weakness 
of mind. 
Again, Folly draws in the sharpest of lines the picture 
of the deluded scholar, seeking tQ. win a vain sort of fame 
by labors which with the best success in the world can but 
please a handful of blear-eyed scholars like himself. As a 
matter of fact, she sets such a man against her happy half-
wit for contrast: 
Fancy some pattern of wisdom to put up against him, 
a man who wore out his whole boyhood and youth in 
pursuing the learned disciplines. He wasted the best 
time of life in unintermitted watchings, cares, and 
studies; and through the remaining part of it he never 
tasted so much as a tittle of pleasure; always frugal, im-
pecunious, sad, austere; unfair and strict toward him-
self, morose and unamiable to others; afflicted by pal-
lor, leanness, invalidism, sore eyes, and premature old 
age and white hair; dying before his appointed day. 
Except for the phrase, "morose and unamiable to others," 
that is an excellent self-portrait. Erasmus spoke from an 
experience that was not without bitterness. What shall 
we say, then? By this condemnation of scholarly devotion 
in the mouth of Folly, does he mean really to condemn 
it? If so, then why did he, after the age of forty-three at 
which he wrote this book, go on to perform as prodigious 
and exacting labors of editorial scholarship as the world 
has known, not only preparing what was in effect the 
editio princeps of the Greek New Testament, with his own 
translation, notes, and carefully wrought paraphrase, 
but editing also the works of St. Chrysostom, St. Jerome, 
and several other fathers of the church? No, what 
Folly says hits pretty well the wisdom of the world. 
Erasmus's own labors are the comment upon it. What we 

[ l ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
know from this is that he undertook those labors with a 
clearsighted view of the cost of them. We might even say 
that he was aware of the folly of them, as judged either by 
the wisdom of the world or by a higher sort of wisdom 
which reveals to every man who has it that whatever he 
may do is in itself vain, and dispensable, yet the soul 
which he throws into it and the life he builds through it 
are not necessarily so. Put into other terms, except God 
build the house, they labor in vain that build it. On the 
mundane level, also, we notice that the temper of Eras-
mus did not accord with that of Folly's despised scholar. 
A favorite word with him was festivus-festive, compan-
ionable. He refused to allow his scholarship to kill his 
humanity. And thus Folly's gird has point, even as used 
by her; the halfwit is understandably human, all too 
human, while the scholar may verge toward something 
inhuman or anti-human. 
Finally, there is the whole matter of Folly's treatment 
of the church and of Christian doctrine. The subject is so 
large that we are confined to a few general observations. 
Erasmus lived and died as a son of the church, suspected, 
it is true, of heresies, and even charged with them by 
many intelligent churchmen. He was hated more bitterly, 
however, by some of the Protestant Reformers, in that 
while he seemed to be saying so much they agreed with, 
he would not take the firm, bold action they believed the 
hour demanded. In this book we find much that bespeaks 
the Reformer rather than the orthodox churchman. The 
truth is that one widely circulated modern edition of 
Kennett's translation of The Praise of Folly was issued by a 
free-thinking publisher as ammunition in his war against 
Christianity. In his "Publisher's Preface" he made a long 

[ li ]
FOLLY AND CHRISTIAN FAITH 
quotation from Folly, beginning, "It is observable that 
the Christian Religion seems to have some relation to 
Folly, and no alliance at all with Wisdom," with pleased 
assent, thereby writing himself down stultissimum. He 
himself wrote: "From the serene Citadel of Truth, armed 
with the weapons of reason and satire, Erasmus has in 
this work severely bombarded the strongholds of Faith." 
But Erasmus, we may flatly say, was interested in defend-
ing and arming the strongholds of faith. In Folly's attacks 
on churchmen she does not stand at the level of worldly 
wisdom, which in general approves those whom she at-
tacks. Neither, except in moments by the way, is she 
speaking nonsense. Every attack is precisely against fol-
lowing in the spiritual kingdom the standards and prac-
tices that prevail in worldly, carnal affairs. Amid all 
Folly's shifts and tergiversations, Erasmus never implies 
that Christianity has more to learn than it has to teach. 
From one point of view, the church's folly has been that 
it has gone to school to the world; from another point of 
view, its folly is its glory. 
Yet Folly's freedom with sacred names and texts has 
shocked many a reverent believer; and in his own time 
Erasmus was coupled with Lucian as an atheistical scoffer. 
This freedom, however, is itself a manifestation of that 
]estivitas which Erasmus found fully accordant with rev-
erence. One does not hurt the sacred truth by citing it in 
the mouth of Folly so much as one hurts it by disavowing 
it in one's life, or using it as a pretext for actions which, 
though serious and grave enough, are plainly hostile to 
good feeling and fundamental decency. One's faith may 
indeed be so real, so present, and so homely that one jests 
with and about it, as if it were a friend or brother. Erasmus 

[ lii ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
believed that Christianity could be at home in a world of 
culture as well as in a religious community or among 
fishers and mechanics. On the other hand, the man of 
culture would be a fool if his cultivation carried him to 
the point where he lost touch with the simplicities of the 
Gospel which are akin to the simplicities of the unlettered 
human heart, even to those of dumb animals. The par-
adox here is as inevitable as that other paradox which 
Folly does not quote but which underlies much of what 
she says: "For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; 
and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it." 
For a more complete appreciation of Erasmus himself, 
we need at least to read his Colloquies and his Enchiridion. 
Yet the present work, as we have seen with the help of 
little drawn from outside it, tells us much. Though it 
contains sad pictures of weakness and misery, it does not 
tell us to laugh that we may not weep; rather it tells us 
to weep and to laugh in humility, "as unto the Lord," 
with a sense of the transience of joy and tears. It suggests 
that there is a simplicity which embraces and transcends 
complexity. The divided mind, the conflict of the soul, 
need not be self-destructive. Although the deepest under-
standing may not bring such experiences to harmony, or 
the play of consciousness give them a musical setting, 
these spiritual powers can at least place them in some 
degree of esthetic distance and relate them intelligibly 
to a pattern not quite crazy. At the more customary levels 
of experience, this book bids us hold our convictions with 
some lightness, and to add grace to life. Our best work 
will be done in a critical spirit, which turns upon our-
selves and itself the same keen gaze and feasting irony 
with which it views the world. We like to think that some 

[ liii ]
THE INEFFECTUAL ERASMIAN 
such spirit informs our universities. But it belongs also to 
this spirit not to talk about itself. Perhaps too much has 
been said already. 
Before leaving the subject, however, we must give a 
hearing to the other side. Rare and precious as may be 
this phlogiston, it is not, we are told, a fuel for the engines 
of action. A Chinese philosophy resulted in a static China. 
Academic scepticism unfits a man for the tasks of life, 
which call rather for the uncritical mind and unham-
pered will. The answer is perhaps threefold, in part a 
denial with counter-charge, in part an admission, and in 
part an amendment. A flat denial, even in part, is the 
weakest of these. It is indeed true, as has been pointed 
out, that Socrates would make a bad member of a fire 
department, were he to answer a fire-call by beginning 
a dialogue upon whether the burning house is worth sav-
ing. Yet it is also fair to say, and needs no insistence, that 
practical men of undivided will often make a terrible mess 
of what are supposed to be practical affairs, and seem to 
go on making such messes either until other practical men, 
single-minded toward other ends, halt them, or until 
there is an influx of the critical spirit into some party to 
the situation. Not every call to action is as immediately 
urgent as a fire-alarm; and men touched by Erasmian 
folly-and Abraham Lincoln was one of them-have 
sometimes planned and controlled and executed palpable 
tasks. Even Folly admits that Marcus Aurelius was a good 
emperor. Thomas More-and this book is his, we find, as 
well as Erasmus's-was a wise and active parliamentar-
ian, diplomat, lawyer, and Lord Chancellor. 
Yet we may admit that in emergencies the Erasmian 
sometimes cuts a poor figure. Erasmus was a pacifist, and 

[ liv ]
THE FOLLY OF ERASMUS 
his folly seems to unfit men for whole-hearted participa-
tion in war. If a man cannot take his place in battle-line 
when necessity arises, most would say, then there is some-
thing fundamentally wrong with him. It is not an ade-
quate answer to say that he represents the civilization 
which the battle defends. It is not adequate to plead 
specialization--non omnia possumus omnes. It is not ade-
quate to say that he follows the counsel of Plato, to step 
into a doorway when the storm grows too fierce. On the 
other hand, one can testify that many a man of Erasmian 
spirit has gone forth to fight, perhaps not whole-heartedly 
believing in the complete righteousness of his cause, or 
even of his action, yet with motives strong enough to 
make him as good a soldier as the next man. It is cer-
tainly possible for one to be willing to die for a cause in 
which one does not wholly believe. Men die for such 
causes every day, not always by compulsion. And if, on 
the other hand, an Erasmian does refuse to fight with 
carnal weapons, it is just as likely that his refusal, in turn, 
does not represent what the world would call a whole-
hearted action. The relation of the Erasmian spirit to 
democracy is a subject in itself; but it must occur to any-
one at this point that democracies, as states, have pro-
ceeded on what we have seen to be the Erasmian prin-
ciple in individuals. That is, the democratic belief is that 
a state can exist and be strong without being totalitarian; 
that it can endure considerable divisions of sentiment 
within it, and that it can even protect the right of in-
dividual conscience without paralyzing the national will. 
The concept of emergency, or crisis, comes at times to 
loom large in our consciousness, and with reason. Yet un-
less it is to swell and involve all other concepts, there is 

CONCLUSION 
place for the Erasmian spirit; and if it so extinguishes all 
else, the Erasmian, at worst, will be but a little less vital 
than the single-minded man of action. When the Duke of 
Norfolk pleaded with Thomas More to go along with the 
Act of Supremacy, warning him that his contumacy 
might cost him his head, More listened patiently and 
then said: "Is that all, my Lord? Then in good faith there 
is no more difference between your Grace and me, but 
that I shall die today and you tomorrow." 
The best in a corrupted form is the worst of all. The 
degraded Erasmian is the shifty, accommodating Pyr-
rhonist, sceptical of all except his own kind of scepticism. 
Irony, in him, becomes cynicism; wit becomes flippancy; 
and his criticism of life adds up to an avoidance of re-
sponsibility. In this he is as far from Erasmus as he is from 
John Wesley or Julius Caesar. In the present book, one 
decisive distinction between Folly and the author is that 
Folly is at times cynical, Erasmus is not. For the rest, 
what Erasmus did has somehow survived and gone on 
working. What men of his spirit did and said and wrote 
has survived to exert a modicum of force in the world. 
Wars, conquests, and revolutions have not quite extin-
guished this spirit, and have not made it seem less of a 
blessing. 


THE· PRAISE· OF· FOLLY 


Preface 
DESIDERIUS ERASMUS OF ROTTERDAM TO THOMAS MORE, 
HIS FRIEND, SALUTATIONS: 
OMING OUT OF ITALY A WHILE AGO, ON MY WAY 
to England, I did not want to waste in idle talk 
and popular stories all the hours I had to sit on 
horseback, but chose at times to think over 
some topics from the studies we share in com-
mon, or to enjoy my memories of friends-and I had left 
some here in England who were wholly learned and 
wholly gracious. Among them you, More, came first to 
mind. Thus, absent as I was, I found delight in the mem-
ory of the absent you in much the same way as, being 
present, I used to enjoy the society of the present you; 
and may I be shot if anything more pleasant than that 
has ever befallen me in life! So because I thought that by 
all means something ought to be done about it, and the 
time seemed hardly suitable for serious intellectual effort, 
I was pleased to have some sport with a eulogy offolly. 
What goddess Pallas, you may ask, put that into my 
head? First, of course, your family name of More prompted 
me; which comes as near to the word for folly as you are 
far from the meaning of it; by the suffrages of all, you are 
as far as one can be. Then I supposed that this exercise of 
wit would meet with special favor from you, because you 
are wont to enjoy to the full jokes of this kind, that is, 
those that are somewhat learned-perhaps I flatter my-
self-yet not at all heavy; and through our common 
c 1 ] 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
course of mortality you move as a sort of Democritus. 
Although, to be sure, because of a certain unique per-
spicacity in your make-up you are accustomed to dissent 
sharply from the crowd, at the same time because of your 
incredibly affable and easy ways you can play the man of 
all hours with all men, and enjoy doing so. 
May you take in good will, then, this little declamation, 
as a keepsake from a friend, and may you also undertake 
to defend it; dedicated to you, it is now yours and not 
mine. For probably contentious fellows will turn up who 
will cavil, on the one part saying that these trifles are 
more frivolous than befits a theologian, and on the other 
that they are more biting than befits a meek Christian; 
and they will cry that we are reviving the Old Comedy or 
Lucian, and carping peevishly at everything. Let any, 
however, who are offended by the lightness and foolery 
of my argument remember, I beg, that mine is not the 
first example, but that the same thing was often prac-
tised by great authors. Homer, all those ages ago, made 
sport with a battle offrogs and mice; Virgil, with a gnat, 
and a salad; Ovid, with a nut. Polycrates eulogized 
Busiris; and !socrates, though a castigator of Polycrates, 
did the same; Glaucon argued in praise of injustice; 
Favorinus, of Thersites and of the quartan fever; Sy-
nesius, of baldness; Lucian, of the fly and of the parasite. 
Seneca sported with an Apotheosis of the Emperor 
Claudius; Plutarch, in a dialogue between Gryllus and 
Ulysses; Lucian and Apuleius, with an ass; and someone 
whom I do not know, with the last will and testament of 
Grunius Corocotta, a hog. Saint Jerome makes mention 
of this last. 

PREFACE TO THOMAS MORE 
Well, if it pleases them, let them suppose that all this 
time I have been playing checkers to refresh my spirits or, 
if they prefer, that I have been riding a hobby-horse. For 
what an injustice it is, when we allow to each way of life 
its own recreations, that none should be permitted to 
studies! Especially when literary trifles may lead to se-
rious matter, and fooleries may be so handled that a 
reader who is not altogether a fathead may garner more 
of profit from them than from the bristling and pompous 
arguments of some whom we know. As, for instance, one 
fellow praises rhetoric or philosophy in a pieced-up ora-
tion, another paints the glories of some prince, another 
exhorts to the end of making war against the Turks, an-
other foretells the future; and still another works up a 
new set of little essays relating to-a lock of goat's-wool. 
Nothing is more puerile, certainly, than to treat serious 
matters triflingly; but nothing is more graceful than to 
handle light subjects in such a way that you seem to have 
been anything but trifling. The judgment of others upon 
me will be what it will be. Yet unless self-love deceives 
me badly, I have praised folly in a way not wholly foolish. 
Now to answer that other cavil, of carping, this liberty 
has always been permitted to men of wit, that in their 
jests they may poke fun at the general manners of men 
with impunity, so long as their license does not extend to 
outrage. For this reason I wonder a little at the tender-
ness of ears in these times, which can tolerate nothing, 
almost, but solemn forms of address. Yes, you will see 
some so perversely religious that they can endure the 
broadest scoffs against Christ Himself sooner than hear 
a pope or a prince glanced at in the most casual sort of 
jest-but especially if something touching revenues is 
[ 8 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
involved. Yet he that censures the lives of men in such a 
way that he points at no individual by name-! ask 
whether he does not seem to teach, and to warn, rather 
than to bite? Otherwise, by all that's holy, under how 
many topics am I taxing myself? Besides, he who spares 
no class of men would seem to be angry at no person, but 
at the vices of all. Hence if anyone turns up complaining 
that he has been libelled, he betrays his bad conscience 
or, at best, his fear. Saint Jerome indulged in this kind of 
writing, and with greater freedom and sharpness; some-
times he did not omit names. But aside from the fact that 
I refrain throughout from using names, I have in addi-
tion so tempered my style that the judicious reader will 
easily perceive that my end is pleasure rather than cen-
sure. I do not anywhere rake into the occult cesspool of 
vices, after the manner ofJuvenal, but take care to set out 
things that are ridiculous rather than foul. Still, if there is 
anyone whom the work cannot please, he should at least 
remember this, that it is a fine thing to be slandered by 
Folly. Since I have feigned her speaking, it was of course 
necessary to preserve decorum in her character. 
Yet why do I say these things to you, an advocate so 
distinguished that you can defend in the best way even 
causes not the best? Farewell, learned More, and dough-
tily defend your Moria. 
From the Country 
June 9th 

MORIAE ENCOMIUM 
THAT IS, THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
A DECLAMATION 
BY DESIDERIUS ERASMUS 


Stultitia loquitur: 
H
OWEVER MORTAL FOLK MAY COMMONLY SPEAK 
of me (for I am not ignorant how ill the 
name of Folly sounds, even to the greatest 
fools), I am she-the only she, I may say 
-whose divine influence makes gods and 
men rejoice. One great and sufficient proof of this is 
that the instant I stepped up to speak to this crowd-
ed assembly, all faces at once brightened with a fresh 
and unwonted cheerfulness, all of you suddenly un-
bent your brows, and with frolic and affectionate smiles 
you applauded; so that as I look upon all present about 
me, you seem flushed with nectar, like gods in Homer, 
not without some nepenthe, also; whereas a moment 
ago you were sitting moody and depressed, as if you 
had come out of the cave of Trophonius. Just as it 
commonly happens, when the sun first shows his splendid 
golden face to the earth or when, after a bitter winter, 
young spring breathes mild west winds, that a new face 
comes over everything, new color and a sort of youthful-
ness appear; so at the mere sight of me, you straightway 
take on another aspect. And thus what great orators else-
where can hardly bring about in a long, carefully planned 
speech, I have done in a moment, with nothing but my 
looks. 
[ 7 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
As to why I appear today in this unaccustomed garb, 
you shall now hear, if only you will not begrudge lending 
your ears to my discourse-not those ears, to be sure, 
which you carry to sermons, but those which you are ac-
customed to prick up for mountebanks in the market-
place, for clowns and jesters, the ears which, in the old 
days, our friend Midas inclined to the god Pan. It is my 
pleasure for a little while to play the rhetorician before 
you, yet not one of the tribe of those who nowadays cram 
certain pedantic trifles into the heads of schoolboys, and 
teach a more than womanish obstinacy in disputing; no, 
I emulate those ancients who, to avoid the unpopular 
name of philosophers, preferred to be called Sophists. 
Their study was to celebrate in eulogies the virtues of 
gods and of heroic men. Such a eulogy, therefore, you 
shall hear, but not of Hercules or Solon; rather of my own 
self-to wit, Folly. 
[2] Nor do I have any use for those wiseacres who 
preach that it is most foolish and insolent for a person to 
praise himself. Yet let it be as foolish as they would have 
it, if only they will grant that it is proper: and what is 
more suitable than that Folly herself should be the trum-
peter of her praises? "She is her own flute-player." Who, 
indeed, could portray me better than can I myself? Un-
less it could so happen that I am better known to some 
one else than I am to myself. On the whole, however, I 
deem that what I am doing is much more decent than 
what a host of our best people, and scholars even, do con-
tinually. With a certain perverse modesty they are wont 
to convey instructions to some sycophantic speaker or 
prattling poet whom they have engaged at a fee; and 
then they hear back from him their praises, that is to say, 
[ 8 J 

WHY SHE PRAISES HERSELF 
some pure fiction. The blushing listener, meanwhile, 
spreads his plumes like a peacock, and bridles, while the 
brazen adulator searches among the gods to find a paral-
lel for this good-for-nothing, and proposes him as the 
complete exemplar of all virtues-from which the man 
himself knows that he is farther away than twice infinity. 
Thus the flatterer adorns a crow with other birds' 
feathers, washes the Ethiopian white, and, in sum, makes 
an elephant out of a gnat. Lastly, I follow the familiar 
proverb of the folk, to the effect that he rightly praises 
himself who never meets anyone else who will praise him. 
Here, by the way, I wonder at the ingratitude, or per-
haps the negligence, of men: although all of them stu-
diously cherish me and freely acknowledge my benefits, 
not a one has emerged so far in all the ages to celebrate 
the praises of Folly in a grateful oration. In the mean-
time, there has been no lack of those who at great ex-
pense of lamp-oil and of sleep have extolled, in elegant 
eulogies, Busiruses, Phalarises, quartan fevers, flies, bald-
ness, and pests of that sort. 
And now you shall hear from me an extemporaneous 
speech, unlabored, but so much the truer for all that. I 
should not want you to think it is made to show off my 
wit, as is done by the common run of orators. They, as 
you know so well, when they bring out a speech they 
have been working on for thirty whole years, and some-
times not their own at all, will swear it was written in 
three days, for pastime, or even that they merely dictated 
it. For my part, it has always been most satisfactory to 
speak "whatever pops into my head." 
[3] And let no one expect that, after the manner of 
these ordinary orators, I shall expound myself by defini-
[ 9 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
tion, much less divide myself. For it is equally unlucky to 
circumscribe with a limit her whose nature extends so 
universally or to dissect her in whose worship every order 
of being is at one. Anyway, what end would be served in 
setting forth by definition a sketch and, as it were, a 
shadow of me, when you, present here, with your own 
eyes perceive me in your presence? I am as you see me, 
that true disposer of good things whom the Latins call 
Stultitia and the Greeks Mwp{a. 
Still, what need was there to tell you this, as if in my 
very face and front, so to speak, I do not sufficiently an-
nounce who I am? As if anyone who was claiming that I 
am Minerva or the Spirit of Wisdom could not immedi-
ately be refuted by one good look, even if I were not 
speaking-though speech is the least deceptive mirror of 
the mind. I have no use for cosmetics. I do not feign one 
thing in my face while I hold something else in my heart. 
I am in all points so like myself that even those who 
specially arrogate to themselves the part and name of 
wise men cannot conceal me, though they walk about 
"like apes in scarlet or asses in lion-skins." Let them 
carry it as cunningly as you could ask, the protruding 
ears will somewhere betray the Midas. An ungrateful 
class of men that, so help me! Altho~gh they are wholly 
of my party, in public they are so ashamed of my name 
that they toss it up at others as a great reproach! Where-
fore, since in fact they are p.wp6rarot, "most foolish," and 
yet are eager to seem wise men and veritable Thaleses, 
shall we not with entire justice dub them p.wpoCF6¢ov~, 
"foolosophers"? It has seemed well, you note, to imitate the 
rhetoricians of our time, who believe themselves absolute-
ly to be gods if they can show themselves bilingual 
[ 10 J 

FOLI.Y'S PROGENITOR 
(like a horse-leech), and account it a famous feat if they 
can weave a few Greekish words, like inlay work, ever 
and anon into their Latin orations, even if at the moment 
there is no place for them. Then if they want exotic 
touches, they dig four or five obsolete words out of decay-
ing manuscripts, by which they spread darkness over the 
reader; with the idea, I warrant you, that those who un-
derstand will be vastly pleased with themselves, and 
those who do not understand will admire the more-and 
all the more the less they understand. The fact is that 
there is a rather elegant species of enjoyment among our 
sect, to fall into special love with what is specially im-
ported. Some who are a little more ambitious laugh and 
applaud, and, by example of the ass, shake their ears, so 
that in the eyes of the rest they will seem to comprehend: 
"Quite so, quite so." Now I go back to my outline. 
[4] You have my name, gentlemen ... gentlemen 
... what shall I add by way of an epithet? What but 
"most foolish"? For by what more honorable style could 
the Goddess of Folly address her devotees? But since it is 
not known to very many from what stock I have sprung, 
I shall now attempt, with the Muses' kind help, to set this 
forth. Not Chaos, or Orcus, or Saturn, or Iapetus, or any 
other of that old-fashioned and musty set of gods, was my 
father at all. It was Plutus, who only, in spite of Hesiod, 
Homer, and Jove himself to boot, is "the father of gods 
and men." At a single nod of Plutus, as of old so now-
adays, all things sacred and profane are turned topsy-
turvy. At his pleasure, all war, peace, empires, plans, 
judgments, assemblies, marriages, treaties, pacts, laws, 
arts, sports, weighty matters (my breath is giving out)-
in short, all public and private affairs of mortal men, are 
[ 11 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
governed. Without his help all that population of deities 
of the poets' making-nay, I speak very boldly, even 
those top gods-either would not exist at all or would be 
"diners at home," keeping house very meagrely. To the 
person who rouses Plutus's anger Pallas herself cannot 
bring help enough; on the other hand, whoever possesses 
his favor can bid great Jove and his thunder go hang 
themselves. "I glory to have such a father." And he did 
not procreate me out of his head, as Jupiter did that 
austere and homely Pallas; but rather out of Youth, the 
loveliest nymph of all, and the jolliest as well. Nor did he 
do this confined in the irksome marriage-bond-the way 
that blacksmith was born lame !-but indeed he did it in 
a much pleasanter manner, "mingled in love," as our 
father Homer puts it. Yet, make no mistake, it was not 
the Plutus of Aristophanes, already decrepit and weak in 
the eyes, that engendered me, but the same god healthy 
and as yet heated by his youth; nor by youth only, but 
also by nectar, which he had chanced to drink rather 
copiously and rather straight at a banquet of the gods. 
If you are also wanting to know the place of my nativity 
(seeing that in these days it is accounted a prime point of 
nobility, in what place you uttered your first cries), I was 
not brought forth in floating Delos, or on the foaming 
sea, or "in hollow caverns," but right in the Fortunate 
Isles, where all things grow "without ploughing or plant-
ing." In those islands is no drudgery or old age, nor is 
there any sickness. In the fields one never sees a daffodil, 
mallow, leek, bean, or any of such kind of trash; but one's 
eyes and nose are enchanted at the same time by moly, 
panacea, nepenthes, sweet marjoram, ambrosia, lotus, 
rose, violet, hyacinth, and the gardens of Adonis. And 
c 12 J 

FOLLY'S ENTOURAGE 
being born among these delights, I did not enter upon 
life with weeping, but right off I laughed sweetly at my 
mother. Nor indeed do I envy great Jupiter his nurse, a 
she-goat, since two charming nymphs nourished me at 
their breasts-Drunkenness, offspring of Bacchus, and 
Ignorance, Pan's daughter. 
These two you see here in the company of my other 
attendants and followers. If you wish to know all their 
names, you will not hear them from me, so help me, ex-
cept in Greek. This one whom you observe here, with the 
eyebrows haughtily raised, is Philautia. She with the 
smiling eyes, so to speak, whom you see clapping her 
hands, is named Kolakia. The one who is half asleep, and 
like a drowsy person, is called Lethe. She that leans on 
her elbows, with her hands folded, is Misoponia. Hedone 
is the one wearing the rosy WFeath and smelling of per-
fumes. The lady with the uncertain eyes rolling here and 
there is called Anoia; and she with the glistening skin and 
body in good point is Tryphe. You see also two male gods 
among the girls, one of whom they call Comus, the other 
Negretos Hypnos. These, I say, are my household ser-
vants, with whose faithful help I bring every sort of thing 
under my rule, maintaining my empire even over em-
perors. 
[5] You have learned of my family, upbringing, and 
companions. Now, that it may not look as if I have 
usurped the name of goddess for myself without good 
grounds, please give closest attention while I tell how 
many advantages I bestow on both gods and men, and 
how broadly my power is displayed. For if, as some one 
has judiciously observed, this only is to be a god, to help 
men, and if deservedly they have been admitted to the 
[ 18 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
rank of gods who have shown to mortals the use of wine, 
or grain, or any other such commodity, why am not I of 
right named and venerated as the alpha of all gods, who 
single-handed bestow all things on all men? 
In the first place, what can be dearer or more precious 
than life? And the beginning and first principle of life is 
owed to whom else but me? Not the spear of "potent-
fathered" Pallas, not the shield of "cloud-compelling" 
Jove, procreates the children of men or multiplies their 
race. Even he, the father of gods and king of men, who 
shakes all heaven by a nod, is obliged to lay aside his 
three-pronged thunder and that Titanic aspect by which, 
when he pleases, he scares all the gods, and assume an-
other character in the slavish manner of an actor, if he 
wishes to do what he never refrains from doing, that is to 
say, to beget children. Now the Stoics believe that they 
are next-door neighbors to gods. But give me a triple 
Stoic, or a quadruple one, or, if you will, a Stoic mul-
tiplied by six hundred; if for this purpose he will not put 
off his beard, the ensign of wisdom (though displayed 
also by goats), yet he will certainly lay by his gravity, 
smooth his brow, renounce his rock-bound principles, 
and for a few minutes toy and talk nonsense. In fine, the 
wise man must send for me, I repeat, if he ever wishes to 
become a father. And why not speak to you still more 
frankly, as is my fashion? I beg to inquire whether the 
head, whether the face, the breast, the hand, or the ear-
all of them accounted honorable members-generates 
gods and men? I judge not; nay, rather that foolish, even 
silly, part which cannot be named without laughter, is 
the propagator of the human race. This is at last that 
[ 14 J 

FOLLY MAINTAINS PROCREATION 
sacred spring from which all things derive existence, more 
truly than from the elemental tetrad of Pythagoras. 
Now tell me, what man, by heaven, could wish to 
stick his head into the halter of marriage if, as your wise-
acres have the habit of doing, he first weighed with him-
self the inconveniences of wedded life? Or what woman 
would ever admit her husband to her person, if she had 
heard or thought about the dangerous pains of child-
birth and the irksomeness of bringing up a child? But 
since you owe your existence to the marriage-bed, and 
marriage is owing to Anoia, a servant of mine, you can 
see how vastly indebted you are to me! Then, too, would 
a woman who has gone through all this, wish to make a 
second venture, if the power and influence of my Lethe 
did not attend her? And in spite of what Lucretius claims, 
Venus herself would not deny that without the addition 
of my presence her strength would be enfeebled and in-
effectual. So it is that from this brisk and silly little game 
of mine come forth the haughty philosophers (to whose 
places those who are vulgarly called monks have now 
succeeded), and kings in their scarlet, pious priests, and 
triply most holy popes; also, finally; that assembly of the 
gods of the poets, so numerous that Olympus, spacious 
as it is, can hardly accommodate the crowd. 
[6] But let it be accounted a little thing that the seed-
plot and source of existence are mine, if I do not show 
that whatever is profitable in any life is also of my giving. 
For what about it? Can life be called life at all if you take 
away pleasure? ... You applaud! I knew that none of 
you is so wise-or rather so foolish-no, I prefer to say so 
wise-as to err on that point. Even the famous Stoics do 
not really scorn pleasure, but they studiously dissemble 
[ 15 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
and attack it in public with a thousand reproaches, only 
to the end that, with other people scared off, they may 
enjoy it more liberally. But let them tell me, by Jove, 
what part of life is not sad, unpleasant, graceless, fiat, and 
burdensome, unless you have pleasure added to it, that 
is, a seasoning of folly? As proof of this, there is extant 
that lovely tribute to me by Sophocles, who can 
never be sufficiently praised, "To know nothing affords 
the happiest life"; and he would be authority enough, 
but come, I will open the whole matter, step by step. 
First of all, who does not know that the earliest period 
of a man's life is by far the happiest for him and by far the 
most pleasant for all about him? What is it in children, 
that we should kiss them the way we do, and cuddle them, 
and fondle them-so that even an enemy would give aid 
to one of that age-except this enchantment of folly, 
which prudent nature carefully bestows on the newly 
born; so that by this pleasure, as a sort of prepayment, 
they win the favor of their nurses and parents and make 
these forget the pains of bringing them up. After this 
comes adolescence. How welcome it is in every home! 
How well everyone wishes it! How studiously does every-
one promote it, how officiously they lend it the helping 
hand! But, I ask, whence comes this grace of youth? 
Whence but from me, by whose favor the young know so 
little-and how lightly worn is that little! And presently 
when lads grown larger begin, through experience and 
discipline, to have some smack of manhood, I am a liar 
if by the same token the brightness of their beauty does 
not fade, their quickness diminish, their wit lose its edge, 
their vigor slacken. The farther one gets from me, then, 
the less and less he lives, until molesta senectus (that is, irk-
[ 16 J 

THE OLD BECOME CHILDREN 
some old age) arrives, hateful to others, to be sure, but 
also and more so to itself. 
Old age would not be tolerable to any mortal at all, 
were it not that I, out of pity for its troubles, stand once 
more at its right hand; and just as the gods of the poets 
customarily save, by some metamorphosis or other, those 
who are dying, in like manner I bring those who have one 
foot in the grave back to their infancy again, for as long 
as possible; so that the folk are not far off in speaking of 
them as "in their second childhood." If anyone would 
like to know the method of bringing about this alteration, 
I shall not conceal it. I lead them to my spring of Lethe-
for that stream rises in the Fortunate Isles, and only a 
little rivulet of it flows in the underworld-so that then 
and there they may drink draughts of forgetfulness. With 
their cares of mind purged away, by gentle stages they 
become young again. But now, you say, they merely dote, 
and play the fool. Yes, quite so. But precisely this it is to 
renew one's infancy. Is to be childish anything other than 
to dote and play the fool? As if in that age the greatest 
joy were not this, that one knows nothing! For who does 
not dread and shun as a prodigy the boy who has a man's 
wisdom? As the proverb current among the folk has it, "I 
hate a boy of premature wisdom." Who could bear to 
converse or transact business with an old man who 
should join to his long experience of things, an equal 
vigor of mind and sharpness of judgment? Hence it is that 
an old man dotes, thanks to me. 
Yet this dotard of mind, meanwhile, is exempt from 
those carking cares by which your wise man is distracted. 
My dotard, too, is still an acceptable pot-companion. He 
does not feel life's tedium, which a younger constitution 
c 17 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
can scarce abide. Occasionally, like the old gentleman in 
Plautus, he goes back to conning those three letters, a, m, 
o-the unhappiest man in the world if he had his wits 
about him; but meanwhile happy, through my grace, a 
source of pleasure to his friends, a hail-fellow-well-met. 
Thus it is that, in Homer, speech sweeter than honey 
flows from the lips of Nestor, while that of Achilles is 
bitter; and in the same author the old men sitting on the 
wall utter gracious and elegant discourse. On this one 
score, indeed, the old even have an advantage over real 
childhood, which is sweet but tongue-tied, and lacks the 
chief solace of life, uninhibited garrulousness. Add to this 
that the old take great pleasure in children, and children 
in turn are delighted with the old. "God ever brings like 
to like." For wherein do they differ, except that age is 
more wrinkled and has counted more birthdays? Other-
wise, their whitish hair, mouth without teeth, shortened 
body, appetite for milk, babbling, chatter, toying, short-
ness of memory, heedlessness, and all their other traits, 
agree exactly. And the farther the old proceed in age, the 
nearer they come back to the semblance of childhood; 
until like children indeed, having no weariness of life or 
sense of death, they take leave of the world. 
Now let anyone that will compare this boon of mine 
with the metamorphoses produced by other gods. Those 
which they worked when angry it is not well to mention; 
but take the stories of people toward whom they were 
especially friendly. They would transform somebody into 
a tree, or a bird, or a cicada, or even into a snake; as if 
this were not to perish indeed-to be made into something 
else! But I restore the very same man to the best and hap-
piest part of his life. And if mortals would abstain utterly 
[ 18 J 

THE FOOLISH STAY YOUNG 
from any contact with wisdom, and live out their span 
continuously in my company, there would not be any 
such thing as old age, but in happiness they would enjoy 
perpetual youth. For do you not see that the austere 
fellows who are buried in the study of philosophy, or con-
demned to difficult and wracking business, grow old even 
before they have been young-and this because by cares 
and continual hard driving of their brains they insensibly 
exhaust their spirits and dry up their radical moisture? 
On the contrary, my morons are as plump and sleek as 
the hogs of Acarnania (as the saying is), with complexions 
well cared for, never feeling the touch of old age; unless, 
as rarely happens, they catch something by contagion 
from the wise-so true is it that the life of man is not 
destined to be in every respect happy. 
These arguments have the strong support of a proverb 
current among the folk; as they often say, "Folly is the one 
thing that makes fleeting youth linger and keeps ugly old 
age away." And rightly do they bruit it about concerning 
the people of Brabant, that although time brings pru-
dence to others, the older Brabanters grow the more 
foolish they are. Yet no other race is more genial than 
theirs in the ordinary converse of life, and no other race 
feels so little the misery of old age. Neighbors to the 
Brabanters, by affinity of temperament as much as by 
geography, are my Hollanders-for why should I not call 
mine those who are such eager amateurs of folly that 
they have won a proverbial name for it, a name they are 
not ashamed of, but bandy back and forth among them-
selves? 
Go, foolish mortals, and vainly seek for your Mcdeas 
and Circes and V en uses and Auroras, and the unknown 
[ 19 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
fountain in which you may restore your youth! When all 
the time I alone have that power; I alone use it. In my 
shop is that miraculous juice with which the daughter of 
Memnon lengthened the days of her grandfather Tith-
onus. I am that Venus by whose favor Phaon grew young 
again so that he might be loved so much by Sappho. 
Mine are those herbs (if they exist), mine that fountain, 
mine the spells which not only bring back departed 
youth but, still better, preserve it in perpetuity. If, then, 
all of you subscribe to this sentiment, that nothing is 
better than adolescence or more undesirable than age, I 
think you must see how much you owe to me, who con-
serve so great a good and fend off so great an evil. 
[7] But what am I doing, talking about mortal men? 
Survey the universal sky, and you may cast my name in 
my teeth if you can find anyone at all among the gods who 
is not foul and despicable except so far as he is graced by 
my divine power. For why is Bacchus always young and 
curly-haired? Simply because, frantic and giddy, he 
passes his life in feasts, routs, dances, and games, and has 
no tittle of converse with Pallas. So far is he from wanting 
to be accounted wise, in brief, that it tickles him to be 
worshipped in gambols and sport; nor is he offended by 
the proverb which gave him the nickname of fool, as thus: 
"More foolish than Morychus." For as time went on they 
changed his name to Morychus, because the wanton 
countryfolk used to smear his statue, placed before the 
gates of his temple, with new wine and fresh figs. And 
then what scoffs the Old Comedy throws at him! "0 
stupid god," they say, "and worthy to be born from a 
thigh!" But who would not choose to be stupid and foolish 
Bacchus, always festive, always downy of cheek, always 
[ 20 J 

FOLLIES OF THE GODS 
bringing gaiety and delight to all, rather than to be 
"deep-counselled" Jove, who frightens everybody, or 
Pan in his peevishness, infecting all things with his dis-
orders, or Vulcan, full of cinders and foul from the labors 
of his shop, or even Pallas herself, "always peering grim-
ly," with her Gorgon's head and fearful spear? Why is 
Cupid forever a boy? Why, but because he is a trifler, and 
cannot do or even consider anything at all sane. Why does 
the beauty of the aureate Venus keep an eternal spring? 
Surely because she is related to me; whence also she bears 
in her face my father's color, and for that reason in Homer 
she is "golden Aphrodite." Lastly, she laughs perpetually, 
if we can in anything believe the poets or their rivals, the 
sculptors. What divinity did the Romans ever worship 
more devoutly than Flora, that breeder of all delights? 
Nay, if one faithfully seeks in Homer to learn the story of 
the austere gods, he will find it replete with folly. But why 
stop to record the doings of the others, when you know so 
well the loves and pastimes of Jove the Thunderer him-
self? When the chaste Diana, forgetting her sex, does 
nothing but hunt, being all the time desperately in love 
with Endymion? 
But yet I should prefer that they heard their exploits 
recited by Momus, from whom they used to hear them 
often; till lately they became wroth and cast him head 
first, along with Ate, down to earth, just because he was 
petulant and interrupted, with his wisdom, the felicity 
of the gods. Nor do any mortals consider the exile worthy 
of hospitality, especially since there is no place for him in 
the courts of princes, where my Kolakia holds top place; 
Momus could no more get along with her than a wolf 
with a lamb. With that fellow thus disposed of, the gods 
[ 21 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
now play the fool much more freely and pleasantly, "do-
ing all things carelessly," as father Homer puts it; that is 
to say, without a censor. For what merry pranks will not 
the ramshackle god, Priapus, afford? What games will 
not Mercury play, with his thefts and deceits? And is it 
not the custom for Vulcan to act as jester at the banquets 
of the gods, and partly by his lameness, partly by his 
taunts, partly by his silly sayings, to enliven the com-
munity drinking? Then there is also that old amorist, 
Silenus, who is wont to dance the cancan, together with 
Polyphemus and his lyre-twanging, and the nymphs with 
their barefoot ballet. The half-goat satyrs act out inter-
ludes. Stupid Pan moves the laughter of all by some bal-
lad, which the gods prefer above hearing the Muses 
themselves, especially when they begin to be drenched 
with nectar. And why go on to rehearse what the drunken 
gods so fitly do after the banquet? Such foolish things, so 
help me, that sometimes I, though I am Folly, cannot 
keep from laughing. Yet it is better at this point to think 
of Harpocrates, for fear some spy among the gods may 
overhear us telling those things which Momus did not tell 
with impunity. 
[8] But now the time has come when, following the pat-
tern of Homer, we should turn our backs on the heavens 
and travel down again to earth, where likewise we shall 
perceive nothing joyous or fortunate except by my favor. 
First of all, you see with what foresight nature, the source 
and artificer of the human race, has made provision that 
this race shall never lack its seasoning of folly. For since, 
by the Stoic definitions, wisdom is no other than to be 
governed by reason, while folly is to be moved at the 
whim of the passions, Jupiter, to the end, obviously, that 
[ 22 J 

THE IRRATIONAL SEX 
the life of mankind should not be sad and harsh, put in-
how much more of passions than of reason? Well, the 
proportions run about one pound to half an ounce. Be-
sides, he imprisoned reason in a cramped corner of the 
head, and turned over all the rest of the body to the emo-
tions. Mter that he instated two most violent tyrants, as it 
were, in opposition to reason: anger, which holds the 
citadel of the breast, and consequently the very spring of 
life, the heart; and lust, which rules a broad empire lower 
down, even to the privy parts. How much reason is good 
for, against these twin forces, the ordinary life of men 
sufficiently reveals when reason-and it is all she can do 
-shouts out her prohibitions until she is hoarse and 
dictates formulas of virtue. But the passions simply bid 
their so-called king go hang himself, and more brazenly 
roar down the opposition, until the man, tired out as well, 
willingly yields and knuckles under. 
But a tiny bit more than a grain of reason is vouchsafed 
to the male, born as he is for handling affairs; and in 
order that he might give and take counsel in manly fash-
ion, he brought me into the council chamber, as every-
where else. Right off I gave him advice worthy of myself: 
namely, that he should form an alliance with woman-a 
stupid animal, God wot, and a giddy one, yet funny and 
sweet-so that in domestic familiarity her folly might 
leaven the lumpishness of the male temperament. When 
Plato shows himself in doubt whether to place woman in 
the class of rational creatures or in that of brutes, he only 
wishes to point out how flagrant is the folly of the sex. For 
if by chance some woman wishes to be thought of as wise, 
she does nothing but show herself twice a fool. It is as if 
one took a bull to the masseuse, a thing quite "against 
[ 28 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
the grain," as the phrase is. It is doubly a fault, you know, 
when against nature one assumes the color of a virtue, 
warping one's character in a direction not its own. Just as, 
according to the proverb of the Greeks, "an ape is always 
an ape, though dressed in scarlet," so a woman is always 
a woman-that is, a fool-whatever part she may have 
chosen to play. 
And yet I do not suppose the female sex is so foolish as 
to become incensed at me for this, that I, a woman and 
Folly as well, attribute folly to women. For if they rightly 
consider the matter, they are bound to score up a credit 
to Folly for this, that in many respects they are better off 
than men. For one thing, they have the gift of beauty, 
which with good reason they prefer above all things else. 
Assisted by it, they wield a tyranny over tyrants them-
selves. Whence but from the malady of prudence comes 
that horrendous visage, rough as to skin, with an under-
growth of beard and a suggestion of senility, in men? 
Whereas the cheeks of women are always bare and 
smooth, their voice gentle, their skin soft, as if presenting 
a picture of perpetual youth. Furthermore, what else do 
they want in life but to be as attractive as possible to men? 
Do not all their trimmings and cosmetics have this end 
in view, and all their baths, fittings, creams, scents, as 
well-and all those arts of making up, painting, and fash-
ioning the face, eyes, and skin? Just so. And by what 
other sponsor are they better recommended to men than 
by folly? What is there that men will not permit to 
women? But for what consideration, except pleasure? 
And women please by no other thing than their folly. The 
truth of this no one will deny who has considered what 
nonsense a man talks with a woman, and what quaint 
c 24 J 

TOPERS' FOOLISHNESS 
tricks he plays, as often as he has a mind to enjoy the de-
lights of feminine society. 
You have heard, then, about the source whence flows 
the first and sovereign solace of life. But there are some 
men, principally old ones, who are topers rather than wo-
manizers, and decree that the highest pleasure lies in bouts 
of drinking. Whether there can be any genteel entertain-
ment with no woman present, let others decide. This 
remains certain: without some relish of folly, no banquet 
is pleasing. Hence if someone is not present who creates 
laughter by his real or simulated folly, the revellers send 
out and get a comedian for hire, or bring in some other 
silly parasite, who by his jests-that is, foolish gibes-
will drive silence and moroseness away from the company. 
For what avails it to load the belly with all those fine 
wines, savory dishes, and rare meats, if similarly our eyes 
and ears, our whole souls, do not batten on laughter, jests, 
and witticisms? I am the only confectioner of these des-
serts. Yes. and those other ceremonies of banquets, such 
as choosing a king by lot, playing at dice, drinking 
healths, sending the cups around, singing in rounds and 
relays, dancing, mimicking-the Seven Sages of Greece 
did not discover these for the solace of mankind; I did. 
The nature of all this sort of thing is such that the more of 
folly it has in it, the more it advantages the life of men, 
which surely ought not to be called life at all if it is un-
happy. Yet unhappy it must needs be, unless by diver-
sions of this kind you chase away ennui, the brother of 
unhappiness. 
[9] Yet there are others, perhaps, who do not care for 
this department of pleasure either, but find satisfaction in 
the love and familiar society offriends, letting it be known 
[ 25 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
that friendship uniquely deserves to be preferred above all 
else; as being so necessary a thing that not air, fire, or 
water is more so; and so delightful that he who would 
take it from the world would take the sun from the sky; 
and lastly so honorable (as if honor had something to do 
with the subject) that the philosophers themselves have 
not hesitated to name it among the greatest goods. But 
what if I demonstrate that I am both the stem and the 
stern of this admired good also? And I shall not demon-
strate it by ambiguous syllogisms, sorites, horned dilem-
mas, or any other sophistical subtleties of that sort; but by 
crude common sense, as the phrase is, I shall point it out 
as plainly as if with my finger. Go to! Conniving at your 
friends' vices, passing them over, being blind to them and 
deceived by them, even loving and admiring your friends' 
egregious faults as if they were virtues--does not this 
seem pretty close to folly? Think a moment of the fellow 
who kisses the mole on his mistress's neck, or of the other 
who is delighted by the growth on his little lady's nose, or 
of the father who says of his cross-eyed son that his eyes 
twinkle? What is all this, I ask you, but sheer folly? Ay, 
you all vote-triple and quadruple foolishness! Yet this 
same foolishness both joins friends and, after joining them, 
keeps their friendship alive. 
I am talking about mortal men, of whom none is born 
without faults; that one is best who is afflicted with the 
fewest of them. Among the god-like Stoics, of course, 
either friendship does not spring up at all, or there exists a 
certain austere and cold variety of it, and even this in but 
few cases-! have scruples against saying, in none. For 
the greater number of mankind play the fool; nay, there 
is no one who does not dote in many ways; and close 
[ 26 J 

FRIENDSHIP MERE FOLLY 
friendship grows up only between equals. Grant that a 
certain mutual benevolence may exist among these se-
vere thinkers, it is by no means steady or enduring-that 
is, among men who are morose and equipped with such 
eyesight that they scan the faults of their friends with the 
keen vision of an eagle or of an Epidaurian serpent, 
though they are sand-blind toward their own vices, not 
seeing the pack that hangs behind their own backs. Since, 
then, the nature of man is such that one can discover no 
constitution which is not liable to great faults-and add 
to this all the great diversity of ages and of education, all 
the slips, all the mistakes, all the accidents, of mortal life 
-how can the pleasure of friendship subsist for an hour 
between those Arguses, unless it is attended by that which 
the Greeks so aptly call €tn}OeLa, which you may trans-
late either as "folly" or as "easy-going ways." But what? 
Is not Cupid, that well-known author and parent of all 
deep affection, stricken right in the eyes, so that with him 
"what is not beautiful seems so"? In like manner, it comes 
to pass among you that what each desires seems fair to 
each; "the gaffer dotes on the gammer, and the knave 
on the wench." These things go on everywhere, and are 
laughed at, but, ridiculous as they are, they cement and 
bind together our agreeable social life. 
What has been said of friendship applies even better to 
marriage, which is an indivisible bond of life. Good Lord, 
what divorces, or worse things, would not happen all over 
the place, were not the domestic association of man and 
woman propped up and fostered by flattery, by jesting, 
by pliableness, ignorance, dissimulation-satellites of 
mine, remember! Mercy me, how few marriages would 
come off, if the husband prudently inquired what tricks 
[ 27 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
his seemingly coy and modest little lady had played long 
before the wedding! And still fewer, though entered upon, 
would last, did not most of the wife's doings escape her 
husband's knowledge, through his negligence or stu-
pidity. But these blessings are owed to Folly. She brings it 
about that the wife pleases the husband, the husband 
pleases the wife, the household is tranquil, the alliance 
holds. A husband is laughed at, called cuckoo, cuckold, 
or what not, when he kisses away the tears of his whorish 
wife; but how much happier thus to be deceived than to 
harass himself by an unresting jealousy and to spoil 
everything with distressing brawls. 
In sum, no society, no union in life, could be either 
pleasant or lasting without me. A people does not for long 
tolerate its prince, or a master tolerate his servant, a 
handmaiden her mistress, a teacher his student, a friend 
his friend, a wife her husband, a landlord his tenant, a 
partner his partner, or a boarder his fellow-boarder, ex-
cept as they mutually or by turns are mistaken, on occa-
sion flatter, on occasion wisely wink, and otherwise soothe 
themselves with the sweetness of folly. 
[10] Now I am aware that this seems the most that can 
be said, but you are going to hear what is greater. I ask 
you: will he who hates himself love anyone? Will he who 
does not get along with himself agree with another? Or 
will he who is disagreeable and irksome to himself bring 
pleasure to any? No one would say so, unless he were him-
self more foolish than Folly. But were you to bar me out, 
each man would be so incapable of getting along with 
any other that he would become a stench in his own nos-
trils, his possessions would be filthy rags, and he would be 
hateful to himself. The reason for this is that nature, in 
[ 28 J 

DANGER OF DISILLUSION 
many respects a stepmother rather than a mother, has 
sowed some seed of evil in the breasts of mortal men, and 
particularly of men somewhat judicious, which makes 
them dissatisfied with what is their own, while admiring 
what belongs to another. Thus it comes about that every 
endowment, every grace and elegance of life, suffers taint 
and is lost. For what avails beauty, chiefest gift of the im-
mortal gods, if it is touched by the malady of decay? What 
price youth, if it is infected by the germs of age? And 
finally, what in the whole business of life, whether private 
or public, can you carry through with grace-for not only 
in art but in every action the great thing is to do whatever 
you do in a seemly way-except as this lady, Philautia, 
stands at your right hand, she who by merit takes the 
place of sister to me, and everywhere plays my part with 
fidelity? 
For what is so foolish as to be satisfied with yourself? 
Or to admire yourself? Yet on the other hand, if you are 
displeased with yourself, what can you do that is pleasing 
or graceful or seemly? Take this ingredient from life, and 
at once the orator, like his style, will be flat and cold, the 
musician will be as sour as his notes, the actor, with all 
his mimicry, will be hissed from the stage, the painter as 
well as his pictures will be cheap, and the poor doctor will 
famish among his poor medicines. Without self-love, 
though you may be a handsome Nireus, you will appear 
like Thersites; you will seem a Nestor, though a Phaon; a 
sow instead of Minerva, tongue-tied instead of eloquent, 
a gawk instead of a man of the world. That is how neces-
sary it is to capture your own fancy, and to appreciate 
your own value by a bit of self-applause, before you can 
be held in price by others. Finally, since the better part of 
[ 29 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
happiness is to wish to be what you are, why certainly my 
Philautia reaches that end by a short cut; so that no one 
is ashamed of his own looks, no one regrets his own tem-
perament, or feels shame for his race, his locality, his 
profession, or his fatherland. An Irishman does not want 
to change places with an Italian, or a Thracian with an 
Athenian, or a Scythian with a dweller in the Fortunate 
Isles. Oh, the singular foresight of nature, who, in spite 
of such differences of condition, equalizes all things! 
Where she has withheld some of her bounties, there she 
is wont to add a little more self-love; but I have made a 
foolish saying, for self-love is itself the greatest bounty of 
nature. 
[11] May I not affirm, indeed, that you will find no 
great exploit undertaken, no important arts invented, 
except at my prompting? As, for instance, is not war the 
seed-plot and fountain of renowned actions? Yet what 
is more foolish than to enter upon a conflict for I know 
not what causes, wherein each side reaps more of loss 
than of gain? As for those who fall, as was said of the 
Megarians, "no particulars.'' And when armored ranks 
engage each other and bugles bray with harsh accord, of 
what use are those wise men, who, exhausted by studies, 
scarce maintain any life in their thin, cold blood? The 
day belongs to stout, gross fellows; the littler wit they 
have, the bolder they are-unless, forsooth, you prefer a 
soldier like Demosthenes, who, since he agreed with the 
poetic sentiment of Archilochus, dropped his shield and 
ran, as cowardly in warfare as he was consummate in 
eloquence. But wise planning, they say, is of most impor-
tance in war. Yes, on the part of a general, I grant; yet is 
it military, not philosophical, wisdom. Far otherwise: 
this famous game of war is played by parasites, panders, 
[ 80 J 

THE WISE ARE INEFFECTIVE 
bandits, assassins, peasants, sots, bankrupts, and such 
other dregs of mankind; never by philosophers, with their 
candles of wisdom. 
How ineffective these philosophers are for the work of 
real life, the one and only Socrates himself, who was 
judged wisest by (not the wisest) oracle of Apollo, will 
serve for proof. When he tried to urge something, I know 
not what, in public, he hastily withdrew to the accom-
paniment of loud laughter from all quarters. Yet Socrates 
was not altogether foolish in this one respect, that he re-
pudiated the epithet "wise," and gave it over to God; he 
also cherished the opinion that a wise man should abstain 
from meddling in the public business of the common-
wealth. To be sure, he ought rather to have admonished 
us that one who wishes to have a place in the ranks of men 
should abstain from wisdom itself. And then, what but his 
wisdom drove him, once he had been impeached, to drink 
the hemlock? For while he disputed and reasoned of 
clouds and ideas, while he measured the feet of a flea, 
and marvelled at the voice of a gnat, he did not fathom 
the commonest concerns of life. But with this teacher 
standing in peril of death, comes now his scholar Plato, 
that remarkable (shall we say?) advocate, who was so 
abashed by the murmur of the audience that he could 
scarcely deliver the well-known half of his first sentence. 
And what shall I say of Theophrastus? When he was 
starting to make a speech, he was suddenly struck dumb, 
as if he had caught sight of a wolf. Could he have heart-
ened a soldier going into battle? Thanks to the timorous-
ness of his nature, !socrates never dared open his mouth 
in public. Marcus Tullius Cicero, father of Roman elo-
quence, used always to begin to speak with an unseemly 
[ 81 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
kind of trembling, like a boy out of breath and gasping; 
and Quintilian interprets this as revealing the wise orator, 
conscious of the difficulty of his task. But when he so 
writes, does he not plainly confess that wisdom is but an 
obstacle to speaking eloquently? What would they do if 
the case were to be argued with cold steel, when they are 
bloodless with fear in a contest of mere words? 
But in God's good grace, after everything else, that 
famous saying of Plato's is trotted out: "Happy is the 
state where philosophers are made kings, or whose kings 
become philosophers!" No, if you consult the historians, 
you will find, as plain as day, that nowhere have princes 
been so baneful to commonwealths as where the rule has 
devolved upon some philosophaster or bookish fellow. 
The Catos, I suggest, give support enough to this point: 
one of them was always vexing the tranquility of the re-
public by hare-brained accusations, and the other totally 
destroyed the liberty of the Roman people, defending it, 
all the while, as wisely as you please. But to the Catos add 
your Brutus, your Cassius, the Gracchi, and even Cicero 
himself, who was no less fatal to the commonwealth of 
Rome than Demosthenes was to Athens. Then there is 
Marcus Aurelius-so that we may allow there was once 
a good emperor, I have just now been able to dig him up 
-who was vexatious and even hateful to the citizens for 
the very reason that he was so good a philosopher. I say 
that we must allow he was a good emperor, yet by leaving 
behind such a son as his, he certainly harmed the state 
more than he had benefited it by his good management. 
For a fact, this whole species of men who give themselves 
over to the pursuit of wisdom run to unluckiness in most 
things, and in none so much as in the children they beget; 
[ 82 J 

THE WISE ARE MALADJUSTED 
nature ordering it thus, I suggest, that the mischief of 
wisdom shall not be too generally insinuated into the race. 
Thus, as we all know, Cicero had a son quite unlike his 
ancestors, and the wise Socrates had children who "fa-
vored the mother somewhat more than the father," as 
one author rather nicely put it; that is, they were fools. 
If it were merely that your wise men approach public 
affairs precisely "as asses do a lyre," it might be borne; 
but they are no more dexterous in performing any of life's 
duties. Take your sage to a feast, and he will mar the good 
cheer either by a morose silence or by conducting a quiz. 
Invite him to a ball, and you learn how a camel dances. 
If you carry him to a play, he will dampen the mirth of 
the audience, and, a modern Cato, he will be forced to 
walk out of the theater because he cannot put off his 
gravity. If he engages in conversation, on a sudden it is a 
case of the wolf in the story. If something is to be bought, 
or a contract made, if, in short, any of those things with-
out which our daily life could not be carried on must be 
done, you will say that this wiseacre is no man, but dead 
wood. Thus he can be of little use to himself, his country, 
or his family, and all because he is inexpert in everyday 
matters, and far out of step with general ways of thinking 
and modes of life among the folk; by the same token he is 
bound to fall into odium, through the great diversity be-
tween his and their lives and minds. For what that passes 
among mortals everywhere is not full of folly, done by 
fools in the presence of fools? If some one wishes to set up 
an opposition to the whole business, I should urge him to 
imita.te Timon and move to some wilderness, where he 
may enjoy his wisdom alone. 
r: 88 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
[12] But let me get back to what I had outlined. What 
power was it drew together into civil society those stony, 
wooden, and wild people, if not flattery? That famed lyre 
of Amphion and that other of Orpheus mean nothing else 
than this. When the Roman people were hatching revolu-
tions, what recalled them to civic concord? A philosophi-
cal oration, perhaps? No, not that. It was a silly and puer-
ile story made up about the belly and the other members 
of the body. The tale Themistocles told about a fox and a 
hedge-hog worked in the same way. What oration by a 
wise man could have availed so well as did the fictitious 
white hind of Sertorius, or as the silly object-lesson of the 
Spartan about the two puppies, or the other one about 
pulling the hair out of horses' tails? I am saying nothing 
of Minos and Numa, both of whom ruled the foolish mul-
titude by making up fables; for by such toys that great 
and powerful beast, the people, is to be controlled. Again, 
what city ever adopted the doctrines of Socrates or the 
laws framed by Plato or Aristotle? On the other hand, 
what persuaded the three Decii to give themselves; for 
their country's sake, to the gods of the underworld? What 
carried Quintus Curti us into that fissure, if not mere glory 
-a certain exceedingly lovely siren who, strangely enough, 
is frowned upon by your wise men. For, as they point 
out, what is more foolish than for a candidate seeking 
office to flatter the people, to buy their favor with doles, 
to court the applause of so many fools, to be pleased by 
their shouts, to be carried about in parades as if he were a 
spectacle for the populace, to have his statue in the mar-
ketplace? To all these add the adoption of new names, 
and nicknames; then add those divine honors paid to very 
sorry fellows, and the deification, at great public cere-
( 84 J 

FOLLY BRINGS ACCOMPLISHMENT 
monies, of criminal tyrants. This sort of thing is most 
arrant folly. One Democritus cannot suffice for laughing 
at it. Who denies this? And yet from this source arise all 
those memorable exploits of doughty heroes which are 
extolled by the pens of so many eloquent men. The same 
foolishness gave rise to cities, by it empires are main-
tained, along with magistracy, religion, policy, and 
courts; nor is human life in general anything but a kind 
of fool's game. 
Let me say a word about the arts. What but a thirst for 
glory has enlisted the talents of men in the task of invent-
ing and transmitting to posterity all these learned dis-
ciplines, which they deem so wonderful? Men who really 
are among the most foolish have thought that by nights 
without sleep, and by their sweat, they could purchase 
fame-I know not what sort of fame, but certainly noth-
ing could be more empty. Yet at any rate you owe these 
choice blessings of life to Folly, and-what is the cream 
of the jest-you reap the fruits of a madness you need not 
share. 
[13] And now, since I have made good my title to re-
nown for courage and resourcefulness, suppose I should 
lay claim also to prudence? "But," someone will say, 
"with no more effort you might mix fire and water." 
Perhaps so. Still, I shall have good success in this, I am 
convinced, if only you will lend me, as you have done so 
far, your ears and minds. And first, if prudence depends 
upon experience of affairs, to whom does the honor of this 
attribute belong? To the wise man, who, by reason partly 
of modesty and partly of faint-heartedness, will attempt 
no action? Or to the fool, who is not deterred from any 
enterprise by modesty, of which he is innocent, or by 
[ 85 ] 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
peril, which he never pauses to weigh? The wise man runs 
to books of the ancients and learns from them a merely 
verbal shrewdness. The fool arrives at true prudence, if I 
am not deceived, by addressing himself at once to the 
business and taking his chances. Homer seems to have 
seen this, for all that he was blind, when he said, "Even a 
fool is wise after a thing is done." There are two great 
obstacles to developing a knowledge of affairs-shame, 
which throws a smoke over the understanding, and fear, 
which, once danger has been sighted, dissuades from go-
ing through with an exploit. Folly, with a grand gesture, 
frees us from both. Never to feel shame, to dare anything 
-few mortals know to what further blessings these will 
carry us! 
Yet if they prefer to have that prudence which consists 
in the mere discernment of things, then hear, I adjure 
you, how far they are from it who still vaunt themselves 
upon the name. For first of all, the fact is that all human 
affairs, like the Sileni of Alcibiades, have two aspects, 
each quite different from the other; even to the point that 
what at first blush (as the phrase goes) seems to be death 
may prove, if you look further into it, to be life. What at 
first sight is beautiful may really be ugly; the apparently 
wealthy may be poorest of all; the disgraceful, glorious; 
the learned, ignorant; the robust, feeble; the noble, base; 
the joyous, sad; the favorable, adverse; what is friendly, 
an enemy; and what is wholesome, poisonous. In brief, 
you find all things suddenly reversed, when you open up 
the Silenus. Perhaps this seems too philosophical a saying; 
but come, with the help of a somewhat fat Minerva (to 
use an old expression), I shall make it more clear. Who 
would not avow that the king is a rich and great lord? 
c 86 J 

ILLUSION MAKES THE PLAY 
Yet let the king be unfurnished in goods of the spirit, let 
him find satisfaction in nothing, and you see in a trice 
that he is the poorest of men. Suppose that his soul is 
given over to vices; now he is a vile slave. In like manner 
one might philosophize concerning others also, but let 
this one serve as an example. 
But where, one asks, does it all lead? Have patience, 
and let us carry it further. If a person were to try stripping 
the disguises from actors while they play a scene upon the 
stage, showing to the audience their real looks and the 
faces they were born with, would not such a one spoil the 
whole play? And would not the spectators think he de-
served to be driven out of the theater with brickbats, as a 
drunken disturber? For at once a new order of things 
would be apparent. The actor who played a woman 
would now be seen a man; he who a moment ago ap-
peared young, is old; he who but now was a king, is sud-
denly an hostler; and he who played the god is a sorry 
little scrub. Destroy the illusion and any play is ruined. 
It is the paint and trappings that take the eyes of spec-
tators. Now what else is the whole life of mortals but a 
sort of comedy, in which the various actors, disguised by 
various costumes and masks, walk on and play each one 
his part, until the manager waves them off the stage? 
Moreover, this manager frequently bids the same actor 
go back in a different costume, so that he who has but 
lately played the king in scarlet now acts the flunkey in 
patched clothes. Thus all things are presented by shad-
ows; yet this play is put on in no other way. 
But suppose, right here, some wise man who has 
dropped down from the sky should suddenly confront me 
and cry out that the person whom the world has accepted 
c 87 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
as a god and a master is not even a man, because he is 
driven sheeplike by his passions; that he is the lowest 
slave, because he willingly serves so many and such base 
masters. Or again, suppose the visitor should command 
some one mourning his father's death to laugh, because 
now his father has really begun to live-for in a sense our 
earthly life is but a kind of death. Suppose him to address 
another who is glorying in his ancestry, and to call him 
low and base-born because he is so far from virtue, the 
only true fount of nobility. Suppose him to speak of others 
in like vein. I ask you, what would he get by it, except to 
be considered by everyone as insane and raving? As noth-
ing is more foolish than wisdom out of place, so nothing 
is more imprudent than unseasonable prudence. And he 
is unseasonable who does not accommodate himself to 
things as they are, who is "unwilling to follow the mar-
ket," who does not keep in mind at least that rule of con-
viviality, "Either drink or get out"; who demands, in 
short, that the play should no longer be a play. The part 
of a truly prudent man, on the contrary, is (since we are 
mortal) not to aspire to wisdom beyond his station, and 
either, along with the rest of the crowd, pretend not to 
notice anything, or affably and companionably be de-
ceived. But that, they tell us, is folly. Indeed, I shall not 
deny it; only let them, on their side, allow that it is also to 
play out the comedy of life. 
[14] As for the next, 0 ye immortal gods! Shall I speak 
or be silent? But why should I be silent, when it is more 
true than truth? Yet haply for such an undertaking it 
might be well to send up to Helicon and fetch the Muses, 
whom the poets are wont to invoke, quite often on 
most trivial occasions. Therefore, be present for a brief 
[ 88 J 

THE UNFEELING ARE INHUMAN 
season, daughters of Jove, while I show to the world that 
one never attains to that renowned wisdom, which the 
wise themselves call the citadel of happiness, except by 
taking Folly as guide. And first, it is beyond dispute that 
all emotions belong to folly. Indeed, we distinguish a 
wise man from a fool by this, that reason governs the one, 
and passion the other. Thus the Stoics take away from the 
wise man all perturbations of the soul, as so many 
diseases. Yet these passions not only discharge the office 
of mentor and guide to such as are pressing toward the 
gate of wisdom, but they also assist in every exercise of 
virtue as spurs and goads-persuaders, as it were-to well 
doing. Although that double-strength Stoic, Seneca, 
stoutly denies this, subtracting from the wise man any 
and every emotion, yet in doing so he leaves him no man 
at all but rather a new kind of god, or demiurgos, who 
never existed and will never emerge. Nay, to speak more 
plainly, he creates a marble simulacrum of a man, a 
senseless block, completely alien to every human feeling. 
Well, if they want it so, I give themjoy of this wise man 
of theirs. They may love him with no fear of a rival, and 
may live with him in Plato's republic, or, if they prefer, 
in the world of ideas, or in the gardens of Tantalus. For 
who would not startle at such a man, as at an apparition 
or ghost, and shun him? He would be insensible to any 
natural sympathy, no more moved by feelings of love or 
pity than as if he were solid flint or Marpesian stone. 
Nothing gets by him; he never makes a mistake; as if 
another Lynceus, there is no thing he does not see; he 
measures everything with a standard rule; he forgives 
nothing; he alone is satisfied with himself alone, uniquely 
rich, uniquely sane, uniquely a king, uniquely a free man; 
c 89 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
in short, uniquely all things, but notably unique in his 
own judgment; he values no friend, himself the friend of 
none; he does not hesitate to bid the gods go hang them-
selves; he condemns as unwholesome whatever life may 
offer, and derides it. An animal of that description is your 
perfect wise man. I ask you, if it were a matter of votes, 
what city would choose such a one as magistrate? What 
army would want that kind of general? Nay, what woman 
would pick, or put up with, that kind of husband? What 
host would have such a guest? Who would not prefer just 
anyone from the middle ranks of human foolhood, who, 
being a fool, would be better prepared either to command 
fools or to obey them; who would please those like him-
self, that is, nearly everyone; who would be kind to his 
wife, welcome to his friends, a boon companion, an ac-
ceptable dinner-guest; and lastly, who would consider 
nothing human to be alien to him. But I grew bored with 
that wise man some time ago; let the speech betake itself 
to advantages not yet touched upon. 
[15] Come, then, and suppose a man could look from a 
high tower, as the poets say Jove is in the habit of doing. 
To how many calamities would he see the life of man sub-
ject! How painful, how messy, man's birth! How irksome 
his rearing-his childhood exposed to so many hurts, his 
youth beset by so many problems! Then age is a burden; 
the certainty of death is inexorable. Diseases infest life's 
every way; accidents threaten, troubles assail without 
warning; there is nothing that is not tainted with gall. Nor 
can I recite all those evils which man suffers at the hands 
of man; poverty is in this class, and imprisonment, in-
famy, shame, tortures, snares, treachery, slander, litiga-
tion, fraud. But you see I am engaged in "counting the 
[ 40 J 

FOLLY PREVENTS SUICIDE 
sand." For what offenses men have deserved these things, 
or what angry god compelled them to be born to such 
miseries, it is no business of mine to discuss at the mo-
ment. But if one ponders upon the evils I speak of, will not 
one approve the example, pitiable as it is, set by the 
Milesian virgins? And yet who are the people that, merely 
because of weariness of life, have hastened their fate? 
Were they not the people who lived next door to wisdom? 
Among them, to pass over such as Diogenes, Xenocrates, 
Cato, Cassius, and Brutus, there was even Chiron, who, 
though he had the privilege of being immortal, took the 
option of death. You will observe, I am sure, what would 
happen if men generally became wise: there would be 
need for some fresh clay and for another potter like 
Prometheus. 
But aided in part by ignorance, and in part by inad-
vertence, sometimes by forgetfulness of evil, sometimes by 
hope of good, sprinkling in a few honeyed delights at cer-
tain seasons, I bring relief from these ills; so that men are 
unwilling to relinquish their lives even when, by the ex-
actly measured thread of the Fates, life is due to relin-
quish them. The less reason they have for remaining alive, 
the more they seem to delight in living-so far are they 
from being stricken with any tedium of life. Surely it is be-
cause of my bounty that you everywhere see these old 
fellows of Nestor's age, with hardly the shape of a man 
left them, babbling and silly, toothless, white-haired, 
bald-or better, let me describe them in the words of 
Aristophanes, "slovenly, crooked, wrinkled, glabrous, 
toothless, and toolless.'' And yet you see them still enjoy-
ing life so much and trying to be young so hard that one 
of them dyes his white hair, another covers his baldness 
[ 41 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
with a wig, another enjoys the use of borrowed teeth, 
probably taken from the jaw of a pig; another is perishing 
miserably for love of some girl, and outdoes any adoles-
cent in his amorous absurdities. And for one of these old 
candidates for the tomb, mere bent sticks as they are, to 
marry with a plump young wife-without dowry, to be 
sure, and destined for the pleasure of others-has become 
so common that it will soon be the approved thing. But 
the best sport of all is to watch our old women, already 
moribund with age, so cadaverous that you would think 
they had come back from their graves, having always on 
their tongues the phrase, "It's good to be alive!" and 
always in heat besides; as the Greeks put it, they "play 
the goat," having at hand some Phaon, engaged at a high 
fee. They industriously smear their faces with paint, 
never getting away from a mirror; they pluck out hairs 
from the strangest places; they display their withered and 
foul breasts; with a quavering love-song they keep awake 
a tired desire; they tipple, and mingle with the groups of 
young women; they write love-letters. These capers are 
laughed at by everyone, with good reason, as being the 
silliest in the world. Yet the old ladies are satisfied with 
themselves, and in the meantime they swim in pleasure 
and anoint themselves all over with honey; they are hap-
py, in a word, by courtesy of me. And as for the people 
who find it all too ridiculous, I want them to mull over 
the question whether it is not better to lead this sort of 
honeyed life in folly than to look for a rafter, as the phrase 
goes, suitable for a hanging. Besides, it makes no differ-
ence to my fools that such things may be held disgraceful 
by the crowd, since fools do not feel disgrace, or, if they 
feel it, they can easily pass it off. If a rock falls on your 
[ 42 J 

TO ERR IS HUMAN 
head, that is bad; but shame, infamy, opprobrium, and 
curses hurt only so far as they are felt. If one has no sense 
of them, they are not evils at all. What harm is it if every-
body hisses you, so long as you applaud yourself? But to 
this happy end, only Folly avails. 
[16] And now I seem to hear the philosophers disagree-
ing with me. But the true unhappiness, they say, is to be 
engrossed in folly, to err, to be deceived, not to know. 
Nay, this is to live as a man. Why they call it "unhappy" 
I cannot see. It is simply that men are born thus, trained 
thus, constituted thus; it is the common lot of all. Nothing 
can be called unhappy if it fulfils its own nature, unless 
you would conclude that a man ought to be pitied because 
he cannot fly about with the birds, and cannot run on 
four feet like the whole family of beasts, and is not armed 
with horns like a bull. But by the same token one will call 
the finest horse miserable because he has not learned 
grammar and does not eat cheese-cakes; one will call the 
bull unhappy because he is such a sorry wrestler. Hence, 
just as a horse ignorant of grammar is not miserable, a 
man who is a fool is not unhappy; the reason being that 
in each case the attribute is consistent with the nature. 
But our logic-choppers have something else to urge. 
Knowledge of the sciences, they say, is peculiarly the at• 
tribute of man; using them as tools, he makes up in his 
powers for what nature withheld from him. As if this had 
the least semblance of truth-that nature, which ex-
pended so much exact care upon gnats, and upon herbs 
and flowers, should have fallen asleep over the making of 
man! So that he has need of sciences-which Theuth, 
that evil genius of the human race, excogitated for the 
hurt of man, and which are so far from furthering his hap-
[ 48 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
piness that they actually hinder it. To that end they were 
discovered~ according to report, just as that wise king in 
Plato wittily proves with respect to the invention of 
letters. Thus the sciences crept in by stealth, along with 
other banes of human life, and from the very sources 
whence all evils flow--devils, let us say. Even the name 
you call them shows this, for "daemons" means "those 
who know" [8a1}p.ovas- =scientes]. 
The simple folk of the golden age flourished without 
any armament of sciences, being guided only by nature and 
instinct. For what need was there of grammar when all 
spoke the same language, and had no other aim in speak-
ing but that some one else should understand? What use 
for dialectic, where there was no battle of opinions ranged 
in contradiction to each other? What room for rhetoric, 
when no man cared to make trouble for his neighbor? 
Wherein was the study of law called for, when folk had 
not learned the evil ways from which, we must admit, our 
good laws arose. Then, moreover, they had too much 
piety to search out, with a profane curiosity, the secrets 
of nature; to investigate the dimensions, motions, and 
influences of the stars, or the hidden causes of things; 
deeming it a sacrilege for mortal man to try to know more 
than is proper to his station. This madness of inquiring 
what may lie beyond the sky never entered their heads. 
But as the pristine simplicity of the golden age little by 
little slipped away, first the arts were discovered-by 
evil spirits, as I have told; but they were few in number 
and accepted by few people. Later on, the superstition 
of the Chaldeans and the frivolous curiosity of the Greeks 
added hundreds of them-mere vexations of the spirit, 
[ 44 J 

THE UNWISE GET AHEAD 
seeing that a single system of grammar will amply pro-
vide continuous torture through a long lifetime. 
And yet among these disciplines the ones that approach 
nearest to common sense, that is, to folly, are held in 
highest esteem. Theologians are starved, naturalists find 
cold comfort, astrologers are mocked, and logicians are 
slighted. "The doctor alone is worth all the rest put to-
gether." Within the profession of medicine, furthermore, 
so far as any member is eminently unlearned, impudent, 
or careless, he is valued the more, even in the chambers of 
belted earls. For medicine, especially as now practised by 
many, is but a sub-division of the art of flattery, no less 
truly than is rhetoric. Lawyers have the next place after 
doctors, and I do not know but that they should have 
first place; with great unanimity the philosophers-not 
that I would say such a thing myself-are wont to ridicule 
the law as an ass. Yet great matters and little matters 
alike are settled by the arbitrament of these asses. They 
gather goodly freeholds with broad acres, while the theo-
logian, after poring over chestfuls of the great corpus of 
divinity, gnaws on bitter beans, at the same time man-
fully waging war against lice and fleas. As those arts are 
more successful which have the greatest affinity with 
folly, so those people are by far the happiest who enjoy 
the privilege of avoiding all contact with the learned dis-
ciplines, and who follow nature as their only guide, since 
she is in no respect wanting, except as a mortal wishes to 
transgress the limits set for his status. Nature hates counter-
feits; and that which is innocent of art gets along far the 
more prosperously. 
Consider: among the several kinds of living creatures, 
do you not observe that the ones which live most happily 
[ 45 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
are those which are farthest from any discipline, and 
which are controlled by no other master than nature? 
What could be more happy than the bees-or more won-
derful? They do not seem to have all of the bodily senses; 
yet what has architecture discovered that can match their 
principles of construction? What philosopher has ever 
framed a republic equal to theirs? The horse, on the other 
hand, so far as he has senses like to man's, and travels 
about with companies of men, is also a partaker in hu-
man misfortunes. Thus many a horse actually feels shame 
to be outrun, and for that reason he becomes wind-
broken by often racing. Or if the horse courts triumph in 
the wars, he is stuck through, and "bites the dust" along 
with his rider. I need not mention the cruel bits and 
sharpened spurs, the prison of a stable, the whips, batons, 
and tie-straps, the rider-in brief, all that tragedy of serf-
dom to which he exposes himself when he imitates brave 
men and too zealously endeavors to wreak vengeance 
upon the enemy. How much more desirable, except for 
the traps laid by men, the life of flies and birds, living for 
the moment and solely by the light of nature! And if it 
happens that birds are shut up in cages and practise 
making the sounds of human speech, it is marvellous how 
they decline from their natural beauty and gaiety. At 
every level of life, what nature has ordained is more 
happy than what is adulterated by art. 
Therefore I shall never praise enough that cock, who 
was really Pythagoras: though but one, he had been all 
things-a philosopher, a man, a woman, a king, a sub-
ject, a fish, a horse, a frog, I think even a sponge-and he 
came to the conclusion that no creature is more miserable 
than man; for all the others are satisfied with their natural 
[ 46 J 

WISDOM IS UNNATURAL 
limitations, but man alone strives to go beyond the 
bounds proper to his station. And among men, in turn, 
this cock ranked simpletons, on many counts, above the 
learned and great. That fellow Gryllus was not a little 
wiser than "Odysseus of the many counsels," when he 
elected to grunt in a sty rather than to expose himself, 
along with that worthy, to painful mishaps. It seems to 
me that Homer, the father of nonsense, does not disagree 
with these sentiments; he more than once applies to all 
mortals the epithets of"wretched and calamity-stricken," 
and still oftener he calls Ulysses, that pattern of wisdom, 
"miserable": whereas he never speaks so of Paris, or Ajax, 
or Achilles. Why should Ulysses be miserable, except that 
the wily and resourceful rogue never undertook anything 
without the advice of Pallas? He was overly wise, and got 
too far away from the guidance of nature. Hence it ap-
pears that among mortals they who are zealous for wis-
dom are farthest from happiness, being by the same token 
fools twice over: that is, although they are born men, 
they then so far forget their own station as to hanker after 
the life of the immortal gods; and on the example of the 
Giants, with arts and sciences as their engines they wage 
war on nature. So also those appear to be least unhappy 
who approach nearest to the temperament and simplicity 
of the beasts, nor ever undertake what is beyond man. 
[17] Come, let us not test this with Stoic enthymemes, 
when we can demonstrate it by a single plain example. By 
the gods above, is there anything that is better off than 
that class of men whom we generally call morons, fools, 
halfwits, and zanies-the most beautiful names I know 
of! You see, I am telling you what at first blush may seem 
silly and absurd but is true many times over. For first of 
c 47 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
all, these folk are free from all fear of death-and this 
fear, by Jove, is no piddling evil! They are free from tor-
tures of conscience. They are not frightened by tales of 
ghosts, or scared to death by specters and goblins. They 
are not tormented by dread of impending evils, and they 
are not blown up with hope of future good. In short, they 
are not vexed by the thousand cares to which this life is 
subject. They do not feel shame or fear, they are not am-
bitious, they do not envy, they do not love. And finally, 
if they should approach even more closely to the irra-
tionality of dumb animals they would not sin, according 
to the writers of theology. I wish you would think over 
for me, you wise fool, how by night and by day your soul 
is torn by so many carking cares; I wish you would gather 
into one heap all the discommodities of your life: then 
you will begin to understand from how many evils I have 
delivered my fools. Remember also that they are con-
tinually merry, they play, sing, and laugh; and what is 
more, they bring to others, wherever they may come, 
pleasure, jesting, sport, and laughter, as if they were 
created, by a merciful dispensation of the gods, for this 
one purpose-to drive away the sadness of human life. 
Thus it comes about that, in a world where men are 
differently affected toward each other, all are at one in 
their attitude toward these innocents; all seek them out, 
give them food, keep them warm, embrace them, and 
give them aid, if occasion rises; and all grant them leave 
to say and to do what they wish, with impunity. So true 
it is that no one wishes to hurt them that even wild beasts, 
by a certain natural sense of their innocence, will refrain 
from doing them harm. They are indeed held sacred by 
the gods, especially by me; and not impiously do all men 
[ 48 J 

FOOLS ARE HAPPIEST 
pay such honor to them. Thus kings find such consum-
mate pleasure in my naturals that they cannot eat, or go 
on a progress, or even pass an hour, without them. The 
fact is that in some degree they prefer these simpletons to 
their crabbed wise men, whom yet they support for dig-
nity's sake. That kings have this preference ought not, I 
suggest, seem remarkable or difficult of explanation: the 
wise men make a habit of bringing before them only 
serious matters, and, confident in their learning, will not 
fear at times "to grate their tender ears with rasping 
truths"; but fools furnish the one kind of thing that rulers 
are glad to get from any quarter and in any shape-jests1 
japes, laughter, pastime. 
Notice also this estimable gift of fools, that they alone 
are frank and ingenuous. What is more praiseworthy than 
truth? Granted that the proverb of Alcibiades in Plato 
attributes truth to drunkards and children, yet all its 
merit is peculiarly mine, even as Euripides witnesses; his 
famous saying has come down to us: "A fool speaks foolish 
things., Whatever a fool has in his heart, that he sets also 
in his face and utters in his speech. But your wise man 
has two tongues, as this same Euripides mentions, one 
used for speaking truth, the other for speaking what he 
judges most opportune at the moment. Black is turned 
into white by these men of wisdom; they blow hot and 
cold with the same breath, and hidden in the breast they 
have something quite different from what they frame in 
speech. With all their felicity, indeed, the princes of 
earth seem to me most unfortunate in this respect, that 
they have no one to tell them the truth, but are com-
pelled to have toadies instead of friends. But, some one 
will say, the ears of princes have an antipathy to truth, 
c 49 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
and for this reason the princes shun wise counsellors, fear-
ing that possibly one more free than the others will stand 
forth and dare to speak things true rather than pleasant. 
Yes, by and large, veracity is disliked by kings. And yet a 
remarkable thing happens in the experience of my fools: 
from them not only true things, but even sharp re-
proaches, will be listened to; so that a statement which, if 
it came from a wise man's mouth, might be a capital 
offense, coming from a fool gives rise to incredible delight. 
Veracity, you know, has a certain authentic power of 
giving pleasure, if nothing offensive goes with it: but this 
the gods have granted only to fools. And for more or less 
the same reasons women are wont to take vast delight in 
men of this class, women being by nature more inclined 
to pleasure and toys. And however they may carry on 
with fools, even if it begins to wax a little too serious, they 
pass it off as a joke or a game-for the sex is ingenious, 
especially in veiling its own lapses. 
Let me return to the topic of the happiness of fools. 
After a life lived out in much jollity, with no fear of death, 
or sense of it, they go straight to the Elysian Fields, there 
to entertain the pious and idle shades with their jests. Let 
us go about, then, and compare the lot of the wise man 
with that of the fool. Fancy some pattern of wisdom to 
put up against him, a man who wore out his whole boy-
hood and youth in pursuing the learned disciplines. He 
wasted the pleasantest time of life in unintermitted 
watchings, cares, and studies; and through the remaining 
part of it he never tasted so much as a tittle of pleasure; 
always frugal, impecunious, sad, austere; unfair and strict 
toward himself, morose and unamiable to others; afflicted 
by pallor, leanness, invalidism, sore eyes, premature age 
(50 J 

A BENEVOLENT MADNESS 
and white hair; dying before his appointed day. By the 
way, what difference does it make when a man of that 
sort dies? He has never lived. There you have a clear 
picture of the wise man. 
[18] But here those Stoic frogs begin to croak at me 
again. Nothing, they say, is sadder than madness; flagrant 
folly is either very near madness, or, what is more likely, 
it is the same thing. For what is madness but a wandering 
of the wits? (But they themselves wander the whole way.) 
Come now, with the Muses prospering us, we shall also 
tear this syllogism wide open. Subtly argued, indeed; but 
just as, in Plato, Socrates teaches us to make two Venuses 
by splitting the usual one, and two Cupids by cutting 
Cupid apart, so in this case it would behoove our dialec-
ticians to distinguish madness from madness-at least if 
they wish to be thought sane themselves. For certainly 
all madness is not calamitous. Otherwise Horace would 
not have said, "Does a dear madness play upon me?" 
Nor would Plato have placed that friendly fury of poets, 
prophets, and lovers among the chief blessings of life. Nor 
would the Sibyl have spoken of the "insane labor" of 
Aeneas. The fact is that "madness" is a genus comprising 
two species: one the revenging Furies send secretly from 
hell whenever, with their snaky locks unbound, they put 
into the hearts of mortal men lust for war, or insatiable 
thirst for wealth, shameful and illicit love, parricide, 
incest, sacrilege, or any other bane the of sort; or when 
they hound the guilty and stricken soul with fiends or 
with torch-bearing goblins. The other kind is far different 
from this. It comes, you see, from me; and of all things is 
most to be desired. It is present whenever an amiable 
dotage of the mind at once frees the spirit from carking 
[ 51 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
cares and anoints it with a complex delight. And such a 
dotage of the mind Cicero, writing to Atticus, wished for 
as a special bounty of the gods, for thereby he could lose 
his sense of the great evils of the time. Nor was that Greek 
in Horace far afield, whose madness took the form of 
sitting alone in the theater all day long, laughing, ap-
plauding, cheering, because he thought fine tragedies 
were being acted before him (though nothing at all was 
on the stage); yet he conducted himself acceptably in 
other relations of life-" pleasant with his friends, kind to 
his wife, and so indulgent to his servants that they might 
open a bottle of his wine without his going into a rage." 
When the care of his family and medical treatment had 
driven away these fits, and he was fully restored to him-
self, he protested to his friends. "By Pollux, you have 
killed me, not saved me," he said, "taking away my en-
joyments this way and destroying by force the very 
pleasant illusion of my mind." And rightly; for they were 
themselves doting and had more need for hellebore, when 
they looked upon such a lucky and pleasant delusion as a 
disease to be driven out by potions. 
[19) To be sure, I have not yet decided whether every 
deviation of the senses or the faculties ought to be called 
by the name of madness. To a man with weak eyes a mule 
may seem to be an ass; another man may admire some 
vulgar song as the finest poetry; neither will forthwith be 
considered mad. But a man who is deceived not only in 
his senses but also in the judgment of his mind, and this 
beyond what is ordinary, and upon all occasions, is bound 
to be considered as close to madness; if, for example, he 
thinks he is listening to a fine orchestra whenever he hears 
an ass braying; or if some beggar, born to low station, be-
[ 52 J 

DELIGHTFUL DELUSIONS 
lieves himself to be Croesus, King of the Lydians. And yet 
this kind of madness, assuming, as is usually the case, that 
it tends to give pleasure, can bring a delight above the 
common both to those who are seized by it and to those 
who look on but are not mad in the same way. This va-
riety of madness is much more widespread than people 
generally realize. Thus one madman laughs at another, 
turn about, and they minister to each other's mutual 
pleasure. You will often see it happen that the madder 
man laughs more uproariously at the one who is not so 
mad. 
The fact is that the more ways a man is deluded, the 
happier he is, if Folly is any judge. Only let him remain 
in that kind of madness which is peculiarly my own, and 
which is so widespread that I do not know whether out 
of the whole world of mortals it is possible to find one who 
is wise at all times of day, and who is not subject to some 
extravagance. It may be only that a man seeing a pump-
kin believes it is a woman, and others give him the 
epithet of "mad," simply because so few people share his 
belief. But when another man swears roundly that his 
wife (whom he holds in common with many others) is a 
Penelope, only more virtuous, and thus flatters himself in 
the key of C-major, happily deluded; nobody calls him 
mad, because they see that this happens to other hus-
bands here and there. 
To this order belong the fellows who renounce every-
thing else in favor of hunting wild game, and protest they 
feel an ineffable pleasure in their souls whenever they 
hear the raucous blast of the horns and the yelping of 
the hounds. Even the dung of the dogs, I am sure, smells 
like cinnamon to them. And what is so sweet as a beast 
[58 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
being butchered? Cutting up bulls and oxen is properly 
given over to the humble plebeian, but it is a crime for 
game to be slaughtered except by a gentleman! There, 
with his head bared, on bended knees, with a knife de-
signed just for this {for it is sacrilege to use any other), 
with certain ceremonial gestures he cuts just the proper 
members in the approved order. The company stands in 
silence, wondering as at some great novelty, although it 
has seen the same spectacle a thousand times. And if some 
bit of the animal is handed one of them to taste, he thinks 
he has gone up a step or so in the ranks of nobility. And 
thus with their butchering and eating of beasts they ac-
complish nothing at all unless it be to degenerate into 
beasts themselves, though they think, all the while, they 
are living the life of a king. 
Very like to these is the class of men who suffer from 
an incurable itch to be abuilding. They transform round 
structures into square ones, and presently square ones into 
round ones. Nor is there any limit, any moderation, in 
this until by dint of having built themselves into utter 
poverty, they have nowhere to live and nothing to eat. 
What then? No matter, they have passed a number of 
years in complete happiness. 
Next to these, it seems to me, come those who keep on 
trying, by new and secret skills, to transmute the forms of 
things, and who ransack earth and sea for a certain fifth 
essence. A honeyed hope cajoles them, so that they be-
grudge no pains or costs, but with marvellous ingenuity 
contrive that by which they may deceive themselves; and 
they go on in this pleasant imposture till, having gone 
through their possessions, there is not enough left to build 
a new furnace. Even then they do not leave off dreaming 
E 54 J 

GAMBLERS AND FABLERS 
their pleasant dreams, but with all their strength they 
urge others to seek the same happiness. And when at last 
they are robbed of all hope, there remains this sentiment 
as a great solace, "In great things 'tis enough to have 
tried." Then they complain that life is too brief and does 
not suffice for the magnitude of their project. 
As for gamblers, I have some doubt whether they 
should be admitted to our college. And yet it is a foolish 
and wholly ridiculous sight to see some of these addicts; 
as soon as they hear the rattle of the dice, their hearts leap 
and begin to beat faster. When, drawn further and fur-
ther by hope of winning, they have made a wreck of all 
their resources, splitting the ship on Dice-Box Rock 
(which is even more deadly than the promontory Malea), 
and have just come through with their shirts, they choose 
to defraud anyone else but the winner, for fear they will 
get the reputation of not being men of their word. And 
what about those old gamesters, half-blind, who have to 
wear spectacles to play at all? At the last, when a justly 
earned gout has tied their joints in knots, they hire an 
assistant to put the dice into the box for them. A sweet 
business, indeed, were it not that the game usually passes 
over into an angry quarrel, so that it appertains to the 
Furies, not to me. 
Here is a sort of men who beyond any doubt bear my 
trademark wholly-the ones who find joy in either hear-
ing or telling monstrous lies and strange wonders. They 
never get enough of such stories, so long as prodigies are 
recounted, involving banshees, goblins, devils, or the like. 
The farther these are from the truth, the more they tickle 
the ears of our friends with pleasing sensations. These 
wonders serve very well to lighten tedious hours, but they 
c 55 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
also provide a way to make money, particularly for priests 
and pardoners. 
[20] And next to these come the folk who have arrived 
at the foolish but gratifying belief that if they gaze on a 
picture of Polyphemus-Christopher they will not die that 
day, or that whoever salutes in certain prescribed words 
an image of Barbara will come through a battle un-
harmed, or that by making application to Erasmus on 
certain days, using a certain kind of candles and certain 
prayers, one will shortly become rich. Indeed, they have 
discovered another Hercules, and even another Hip-
polytus, in George; whose horse, piously decked out with 
trappings and bosses, they all but worship, often com-
mending themselves to him by some little gift; while to 
swear by St. George-'s brass helmet is an oath for a king. 
Then what shall I say of the people who so happily fool 
themselves with forged pardons for sins, measuring out 
time to be spent in purgatory as if with an hour-glass, and 
figuring its centuries, years, months, days, and hours as 
if from a mathematical table, beyond possibility of error? 
Or I might speak of those who will promise themselves 
any and every thing, relying upon certain charms or 
prayers devised by some pious impostor either for his 
soul's sake or for money, to bring them wealth, reputation, 
pleasure, plenty, good health, long life, and a green old 
age, and at last a seat next to Christ's in heaven-but 
they do not wish to get it too soon. That is to say, when 
the pleasures of this life have finally failed them, willy-
nilly, Jhough they struggled tooth and nail to hold on to 
them, then it is time for the bliss of heaven to arrive. 
I fancy that I see some merchant or soldier or judge 
laying down one small coin from his extensive booty and 
[ 56 J 

FOOLISH DEVOTIONS 
expecting that the whole cesspool of his life will be at once 
purified. He conceives that just so many perjuries, so 
many lustful acts, so many debauches, so many fights, 
murders, frauds, lies, and so many breaches of faith, are 
bought off as by contract; and so bought off that with a 
clean slate he may start from scratch upon a new round 
of sins. And who are more foolish, yet who more happy, 
than those who promise themselves something more than 
the highest felicity if they daily recite those seven verses of 
the Psalms? The seven, I mean, which some devil, a play-
ful one, but blabbing rather than crafty, is believed to 
have pointed out to St. Bernard after he had been duped 
by the saint's trick. Things like that are so foolish, you 
know, that I am almost ashamed of them myself; yet they 
stand approved not only by the common people but even 
by teachers of religion. And is it not almost as bad when 
the several countries each lay claim to a particular saint 
of their own, and then assign particular powers respec-
tively to the various saints and observe for each one his 
own peculiar rites of worship? One saint assists in time of 
toothache, another is propitious to women in travail, an-
other recovers stolen goods, a fourth stands by with help 
in a shipwreck, and still another keeps the sheep in good 
repair; and so of the rest, though it would take too long to 
specify all of them. Some of them are good for a number 
of purposes, particularly the Virgin Mother, to whom 
the common people tend to attribute more than to the 
Son. 
Yet what do men ask of these saints except things that 
pertain to folly? Think a bit: among all those consecrated 
gifts which you see covering the walls of some churches, 
and even hung on the ceiling, do you ever find one given 
[ 57 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
in gratitude for an escape from folly, or because the giver 
has been made any whit wiser? One person has come safe 
to land. A second survived being run through in a duel. 
One no less fortunately than bravely got away from a 
battlefield, leaving the rest to fight. Another was brought 
near to the gallows, but by favor of some saint who is 
friendly to thieves he has decided that he should go on 
relieving those who are burdened with too much wealth. 
Another escaped in a jail-break. Another came through 
a fever, in spite of hig doctor. The poisoned drink of an-
other, by loosening his bowels, served to cure him instead 
of kill him, not at all to the joy of his wife, who lost both 
her labor and her expenses. Another's cart was turned 
over, but he drove both horses home safely. Another was 
dug out of the debris of a fallen house. Another, caught in 
the act by a husband, made good his escape. No one gives 
thanks for a recovery from being a fool. So sweet it is not 
to be wise that mortal men will pray to be delivered from 
anything sooner than from Folly. 
But why should I launch out upon this ocean of super-
stition? "For if I had a hundred tongues, a hundred 
mouths, a voice of brass, I could not set forth all the 
shapes offools or run over all the names offolly." Yet the 
whole life of Christian folk everywhere is full of fanati-
cisms of this kind. Our priests allow them, without regret, 
and even foster them, being aware of how much money 
is wont to accrue from this source. In this posture of 
affairs, suppose that some odious wise man were to step 
up and sing out this, which is true: "You will not die 
badly if you live well. You get quit of your sins if you add 
to the money payment a hatred of evil-doing, add tears, 
watchings, prayers, fastings; and if you alter the whole 
[ 58 J 

MILDER MANIAS 
basis of your life. This or that saint will be gracious to you 
if you emulate his goodness." If the wise man, I say, were 
to start howling out things like that, just see from what 
contentment, and into what a turmoil, he would all of a 
sudden drive the souls of men! 
To this college of ours belong those who, while they are 
living, scrupulously arrange the funeral ceremonies with 
which they desire to be laid away, prescribing exactly 
how many candles, how many mourners, how many 
singers, and how many hired pallbearers they wish to 
have there. It is precisely as if they expected that some 
capacity for appreciating the spectacle would come back 
to them, or that, lying dead, they would feel ashamed if 
the body was not laid away in grand style. They are as 
zealous about the matter as if they had been made aediles, 
charged with providing shows and feasts. 
Although I must hasten on, I cannot pass over in 
silence those who, while differing in no respect from the 
meanest tinker, flatter themselves beyond measure with 
the empty title of nobility. One will trace his family back 
to Aeneas, one to Brutus, and a third to King Arthur. In 
every room they display pictures and busts of their an-
cestors. They specify their grandfathers and great-grand-
fathers, and have by heart the ancient names, while all 
the time they are not so different from senseless statues 
themselves and are worth, it may be, less than the ones 
they show off. Yet by virtue of my lovely companion 
Philautia, they lead a pleasant life. There will always be 
other fools, too, to admire specimens of this breed as if 
they were gods. 
[21] Why speak of this or that contingent, however, as 
if Lady Philautia did not everywhere and among all ranks 
c 59 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
use her wonderful skills to make men happy as happy can 
be? Though this man is uglier than an ape, obviously he 
seems a Nireus to himself. This one, drawing three lines 
with a compass, thinks himself a Euclid; this other, as 
musical as "an ass with a lyre," though "he sounds worse 
than a cock treading a hen," believes that he sings like 
another Hermogenes. But of all madness, that is sweetest 
whereby a person glories in some useful gift possessed by 
members of his household as if it were his own. Such was 
that doubly blessed rich man in Seneca: whenever he 
told a story, he had a brace of servants at hand to prompt 
him on the names. Though a man otherwise so weak that 
he could scarcely keep alive, he would not hesitate to get 
into a fist-fight, relying on the circumstance that he had a 
lot of stout fellows in his entourage. 
What need we say about practitioners in the arts? Self-
love is the hallmark of them all. You will find that they 
would sooner give up their paternal acres than any piece 
of their poor talents. Take particularly actors, singers, 
orators, and poets; the more unskilled one of them is, the 
more insolent he will be in his self-satisfaction, the more 
he will blow himself up, and spread himself. And "like 
lips find like lettuce"; indeed, the more absurd a thing is, 
the more admirers it collects. Thus the worst art pleases 
the most people, for the simple reason that the larger part 
of mankind, as I said before, is subject to folly. If, there-
fore, the less skilled man is more pleasing both in his own 
eyes and in the wondering gaze of the many, what reason 
is there that he should prefer sound discipline and true 
skill? In the first place, these will cost him a great outlay; 
in the second place, they will make him more affected 
[ 60 J 

NATIONAL SELF-FLATTERY 
and meticulous; and finally, they will please far fewer of 
his audience. 
And now I see that it is not only in individual men that 
nature has implanted self-love. She implants a kind of it 
as a common possession in the various races, and even 
cities. By this token the English claim, besides a few other 
things, good looks, music, and the best eating as their 
special properties. The Scots flatter themselves on the 
score of high birth and royal blood, not to mention their 
dialectical skill. Frenchmen have taken all politeness for 
their province; though the Parisians, brushing all others 
aside, also award themselves the prize for knowledge of 
theology. The Italians usurp belles /ettres and eloquence; 
and they all flatter themselves upon the fact that they 
alone, of all mortal men, are not barbarians. In this par-
ticular point of happiness the Romans stand highest, still 
dreaming pleasantly of ancient Rome. The Venetians are 
blessed with a belief in their own nobility. The Greeks, 
as well as being the founders of the learned disciplines, 
vaunt themselves upon their titles to the famous heroes 
of old. The Turks, and that whole rabble of the truly bar-
barous, claim praise for their religion, laughing at Chris-
tians as superstitious. And what is much more pleasant, 
the Jews still are awaiting their own Messiah, and even 
today hold on to their Moses with might and main. 
Spaniards yield to no one in martial reputation. Germans 
take pride in their great stature and their knowledge of 
magic. 
But not to pursue details, I am sure you observe how 
Philautia is the parent of delight for men, in particular 
and in general; and her sister Flattery is almost as fruitful. 
Indeed, Philautia is nothing but a cajoling of one's own 
[ 61 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
self; do the same thing to someone else, and it becomes 
Kolakia. Nowadays this adulation is in bad odor, but 
only among those who are more concerned about names 
of things than things themselves. They have the notion 
that bad faith is inseparable from adulation; but the ex-
amples of dumb animals, even, could show them how far 
they are wrong. What is more fawning than a dog? And 
yet what is more faithful? What is more fond and caress-
ing than a squirrel? But where will you find a better 
friend to man? Unless, perhaps, it seems to you that fierce 
lions, pitiless tigers, or fiery leopards stand humanity in 
better stead. To be sure, there is a baneful kind of flattery 
by which certain traitors and mockers drive their 
wretched victims to destruction. But this of mine pro-
ceeds from a certain kindness and candor of mind, and 
is much nearer to virtue than is what stands opposite to 
it-asperity, or what Horace calls "uncomely and heavy 
moroseness." My flattery raises the dejected spirit, it 
soothes those who are grieving, freshens the faint, quick-
ens the dull, eases the suffering, mollifies the fierce, joins 
loves together and keeps them so joined. It allures child-
hood to pursue the study of literature, it cheers the old, 
and, under the color of praise, it warns and instructs 
princes without offense. In brief, it acts to make every 
man more pleasing and more dear to himself; this is in-
deed the main point of happiness. What is more gracious 
than the way two mules scratch each other? Meanwhile, 
I shall not go on to tell how this flattery bears a great part 
in your famous eloquence, a greater part in medicine, 
and the greatest part of all in poetry. To conclude, it is 
honey and spice of all human intercourse. 
[ 62 J 

MAN HUGS DELUSION 
[22] But it is a sad thing, they say, to be deceived. No; 
the saddest thing is not to be deceived. For they are quite 
beside the mark who think· that the happiness of a man is 
to be found in things, as such; it resides in opinion. For 
such is the obscurity and variety of human affairs that 
nothing can be clearly known, as has been correctly said 
by my Academics, the least impudent of the philosophers. 
Or if something can be known, usually it is something 
that makes against the enjoyment of life. Finally, the 
mind of man is so constructed that it is taken far more 
with disguises than with realities. If anyone wants to 
make a convincing and easy test of this, let him go to 
church and listen to sermons. If something solid is being 
said, everybody sleeps, or yawns, or is ill at ease. But if 
the bawler-1 made a slip, I meant to say prater-as 
they so often do, begins some old wives' tale, everybody 
awakens, straightens up, and gapes for it. Also if there is 
a somewhat fabulous or poetical saint (and if you want an 
example, imagine George or Christopher or Barbara to 
belong to this class), you will see him honored much more 
religiously than Peter or Paul or even Christ himself. But 
these things do not belong here. 
Yet how little this addition to happiness costs! whereas 
it is necessary to lay out a much greater price for almost 
any of the solid things, even for the poorest of them-
grammar, for instance. But opinion is picked up very 
easily, and yet for all that, it conduces far more to hap-
piness. Suppose a man is eating some rotten kippers, and 
the man beside him cannot abide the smell of them; but 
to the eater they taste and smell like ambrosia. I ask you, 
what is the consequence, as regards happiness? On the 
other hand, if the best sturgeon turns your stomach, what 
[ 68 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
can it contribute to the blessedness of existence? If a man 
has a wife who is notoriously ugly, yet who seems to her 
husband fit to enter a competition with Venus herself, is 
it not the same as if she were truly beautiful? If one was 
to behold a canvas daubed with red lead and mud, and to 
admire it under the persuasion that it was a picture by 
Apelles or Zeuxis, would he not be happier than another 
who buys the work of such masters at a high price, but 
feels less of pleasure, perhaps, in viewing it? I know a 
man of my name who gave his young wife some imitation 
jewels as a present, persuading her-for he is a plausible 
joker-that they were not only genuine and natural but 
also of unique and inestimable value. Pray tell me, what 
difference did it make to the girl, so long as she joyously 
delighted her eyes and heart with glass, and carefully 
kept these trinkets in a safe place never far from her per-
son? In the meantime, her husband had avoided expense, 
he had enjoyed his wife's delusion, and he had bound her 
to himself no less than as if he had given greater pur-
chases. In your judgment, what difference is there be-
tween those who in Plato's cave look admiringly at the 
shadows and simulacra of various things, desiring noth-
ing, quite well satisfied with themselves, as against the 
wise man who emerges from the cave and sees realities? 
If Micyllus, in Lucian, had been allowed always to go on 
dreaming that rich and golden dream, there would have 
been no reason for him to choose any other happiness. 
Hence there either is no difference or, if there is differ-
ence, the state of fools is to be preferred. First, their hap-
piness costs least. It costs only a bit of illusion. And 
second, they enjoy it in the company of so many others. 
The possession of no good thing is welcome without a 
[ 64 J 

FOLLY VS. OTHER DEITIES 
companion. And who has not heard of the paucity of 
wise men-if indeed any is to be found. Out of several 
centuries the Greeks counted seven altogether; yet, so 
help me, if one were to canvass them with care and ac-
curacy, may I be shot if he would find so much as one 
half-wise man-nay, so much as one-third of one wise 
man! 
[23] You recall that among the many glories of Bacchus 
this is held to be chief, that he washes away the cares of 
the soul. Yet it is for a short time only, for as soon as you 
sleep off his fumes, the cares of the soul come galloping 
back, riding four white horses, as the saying is. How much 
more bounteous and more prompt is my boon! For I fill 
the mind with a sort of perpetual drunkenness; I glut it 
with joys, dear delights, and gay fancies; and this without 
any formalities or difficulties. I have seen to it that no 
man alive should be without my blessing; but the gifts of 
the other deities come with partiality, certain ones to 
certain people. Not everywhere, for instance, is produced 
the rich and mild wine "which drives away cares, and 
attends upon opulent hope." Beauty of face, the gift of 
Venus, is granted to few; eloquence, the gift of Mercury, 
to still fewer. Not many, by having the favor of Hercules, 
get riches. Homer's Jupiter does not bestow upon just 
anyone the rule of kingdoms. Often Mars favors neither 
army. Many depart sad from Apollo's tripod. Jove often 
thunders. Apollo sometimes sends pestilence on his ar-
rows. Neptune drowns more than he saves. And of course 
I might make mention of the anti-Joves, of Pluto, Ate, 
Poena, Febris, and their kind-no gods at all but hang-
men. It is only I, Folly, who embrace all men without 
distinction in my provident goodness. Nor do I wait for 
[ 65 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
prayers. I am not pettish, demanding expiations if some 
ceremony has been overlooked. Nor do I throw heaven 
and earth into an uproar if someone has issued an invita-
tion to the other gods, but has left me at home, not allow-
ing me to partake of the smoke of their sacrifice!~. The fact 
is that the captiousness of the other gods is such that one is 
likely to get along better, and is even safer, if he neglects 
them entirely, than if he undertakes to worship them 
properly. There are men like that, so hard to please and 
so sensitive to injury that it pays better to hold them as 
utter strangers than to have any familiarity with them. 
But they tell us that nobody sacrifices, or builds a 
temple, to Folly. Yes, and I am amazed, as I said before, 
at such ingratitude. Yet in my easy-going way I take this 
in good part, though I could scarcely complain, with any 
grace, about the lack of such attentions; for why should 
I demand incense or meal or a he-goat or a she-hog, when 
men in all parts of the world unanimously accord me that 
kind of worship which is specially approved by our 
divines? Maybe I ought to envy Diana, because she is 
appeased by human blood! No, I consider that I am most 
piously worshipped when men-and they all do it-take 
me to their souls, manifest me in their actions, and 
represent me in their lives. This kind of worship of the 
saints is extremely rare among Christians. Plenty of them 
will burn a little candle to the Virgin Mother, and this 
at noon when it is unnecessary; but how few burn with 
zeal to imitate her in chastity of life, temperance, love of 
heavenly things! For this, at the last, is true worship, by 
far most pleasing to those above. Besides, what should I 
want of a temple, when the universal world is my temple, 
and, if I mistake not, a goodly one? Nor are communi-
[ 66 J 

SHE IS WORSHIPPED EVERYWHERE 
cants lacking--except where men are lacking. I am not 
so foolish as to ask stone images, painted up in colors; 
they would but hinder the worship of me, since by the 
stupid and dull those figures are worshipped instead of the 
saints themselves. And it would come about with me 
exactly as it usually does with the saints-they are thrown 
out of doors by their substitutes. I consider that I have 
many statues erected to me, as many as there are mortals 
who bear my living presentment in their faces, even if it 
is against their will. Hence I have no reason to envy the 
other gods if one or the other is worshipped in some par-
ticular corner of the earth, and that on stated days only-
as, for instance, Phoebus is worshipped in Rhodes, Venus 
in Cyprus, Juno at Argos, Minerva at Athens, Jupiter 
on Olympus, Neptune at Tarentum, Priapus at Lamp-
sacus-so long as I have the entire world zealously offer-
ing far greater sacrifices to me. 
[24] And if I should seem at this point to be speaking 
more rashly than truly, I suggest that for a time we shall 
look into the lives of men, and it will be apparent how 
much they owe to me and how many, the greatest along 
with the humble, follow me. We shall not run over the 
lives of everybody, for that would take too long, but only 
the most notable; from which it will be easy to form an 
opinion about the others. For why should I spend time on 
the common and baser sort, who are wholly mine beyond 
controversy? They everywhere teem with so many forms 
offolly and daily devise so many new ones that a thousand 
Democrituses would not suffice for laughing at them-
and there would be work, then, for one more Democritus 
to laugh at the laughers. 
c 67 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
You would never believe what sport and entertainment 
your mortal manikins provide daily for the gods. These 
gods, you know, set aside their sober forenoon hours for 
composing quarrels and giving ear to prayers. But after 
that, when they are well moistened with nectar and have 
no desire for the transaction of business, they seek out 
some promontory of heaven and, sitting there with faces 
bent downward, they watch what mortal men are ado-
ing. There is no show like it. Good God, what a theater! 
How various the action of fools! (I may say that now and 
then I take a seat alongside the gods of the poets.) Here is 
a fellow dying for love of a sweet young thing, and the 
less he is loved in return, the more helplessly he is in love. 
This one marries a dowry, not a wife. This one prostitutes 
his own wife. The jealousy of another keeps watch like 
Argus. Here is a man in mourning, but mercy me, what 
fool things he says and does! Hiring mourners as if they 
were actors, to play a comedy of grief! Another man 
squeezes out a tear at the tomb of his mother-in-law. This 
one spends on his belly whatever he can scrape together 
by hook or crook, but presently he will be just as hungry 
again. Another finds nothing better than sleep and idle-
ness. There are those who get themselves into a stew work-
ing at what is other people's business, while they neglect 
their own. There is also the broker, who accounts himself 
rich on other people's money, but is on the way to bank-
ruptcy. Another thinks that the happy life consists in 
living like a pauper in order that his heir may be wealthy. 
Another, for the sake of a small and uncertain profit, 
sails the seven seas, exposing his life, which no money 
could pay for, to the hazard of waves and winds. This one 
prefers seeking riches in war to passing a safe and quiet 
( 68 J 

THE RUN OF FOOLS 
life at home. Some decide that they can most conveniently 
attain to wealth by courting and fawning upon childless 
old men. There are even those who prefer to do the same 
to rich old women. Both kinds furnish rare sport to the 
gods who are spectators, because they are usually cheated 
by the parties they set out to catch. 
But the most foolish and sordid of all are your mer-
chants, in that they carry on the most sordid business of 
all and this by the most sordid methods; for on occasion 
they lie, they perjure themselves, they steal, they cheat, 
they impose on the public. Yet they make themselves 
men of importance-because they have gold rings on 
their fingers. Nor do they lack for flattering friars who 
admire them and call them Right Honorable in public, 
with the purpose, surely, that some little driblet from the 
ill-gotten gains may flow to themselves. Elsewhere you 
will see certain Pythagoreans, in whose eyes all things are 
common-to such a degree, in fact, that whatever they 
light upon that is lying around loose they carry off with 
a tranquil spirit, as if it passed to them by inheritance. 
There are others who are rich only in wishes; they build 
beautiful air-castles and conceive that doing so is enough 
for happiness. Some delight in passing for wealthy men 
away from home, though they starve meanly enough in 
their own houses. One man hastens to put into circula-
tion what money he has; his neighbor hoards his up 
through thick and thin. This one pushes forward as a 
candidate for public honors; that one finds his pleasure 
by his fireside. A good many people bring suits which are 
destined never to end; once and again they eagerly strive 
to outdo each other-in enriching the judge who sets the 
postponements and the advocate who colludes with him. 
[ 69 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
One burns with zeal for revolutions; another is toiling 
upon his Grand Scheme. This man leaves wife and 
children at home and sets out on a pilgrimage to Jeru-
salem, Rome, or the shrine of St. James, where he has no 
particular business. In sum, if you might look down from 
the moon, as Menippus did of old, upon the numberless 
agitations among mortal men, you would think you were 
seeing a swarm of flies or gnats, quarreling among them-
selves, waging wars, setting snares for each other, robbing, 
sporting, wantoning, being born, growing old, and dy-
ing. And one can scarce believe what commotions and 
what tragedies this animalcule, little as he is and so soon 
to perish, sets agoing. For sometimes a trivial war or a 
spell of the plague will sweep off and utterly wipe out 
thousands of them at once. 
[25] But I should be most foolish myself and worthy of 
the manifold laughter of Democritus, if I should go on 
counting forms of folly and madness among the folk. Let 
me turn to those who maintain among mortals an ap-
pearance of wisdom and, as the saying is, seek for the 
golden bough. Among these the grammarians hold first 
place. Nothing could be more calamity-stricken, nothing 
more afflicted, than this generation of men, nothing so 
hated of God, if I were not at hand to mitigate the pains 
of their wretched profession by a certain sweet infusion of 
madness. For they are not only liable to the five curses 
which the Greek epigram calls attention to in Homer, but 
indeed to six hundred curses; as being hunger-starved and 
dirty in their schools-! said "their schools," but it were 
better said "their knowledge-factories" or "their mills" 
or even "their shambles"-among herds of boys. There 
they grow old with their labors, they are deafened by the 
[ 70 J 

FOLLIES OF GRAMMARIANS 
noise, they sicken by reason of the stench and nastiness. 
Yet thanks to me, they see themselves as first among men; 
so greatly do they please themselves when they terrify the 
timorous band by a menacing look and tone; when they 
beat the little wretches with ferules, rods, or straps; and 
when, imitating the ass in Aesop, they storm fiercely in 
all directions, as whim may dictate. And do you know, all 
the dirtiness seems sheer elegance, the stench is perfume 
of sweet marjoram, and the miserable servitude con-
sidered to be a kingdom, such a one that they would not 
trade their tyranny for the empire of Phalaris or Diony-
sius. 
But nowadays they are especially happy in their new 
illusion of being learned. Of course they cram their pupils 
with utter nonsense, but, good Lord, what Palemon, 
what Donatus, do they not scorn in comparison with 
themselves! I do not know by what sleight of hand they 
work it so well, but to the foolish mot;hers and addlepated 
fathers of their pupils they seem to be just what they make 
themselves out to be. On top of this they have another 
pleasure. When one of them can drag out of some worm-
eaten manuscript such a fact as the name of Anchises' 
mother or some word not generally known, such as 
bubsequa, bovinator, or manticulator; or if one can dig up 
somewhere a fragment of an ancient tombstone with an 
inscription badly worn away-0 Jupiter! what exulting 
then, what triumphs, what panegyrics, as if they had 
conquered Africa or captured Babylon. 
As for those stilted, insipid verses they display on all 
occasions (and there are those to admire them), ob-
viously the writer believes that the soul of Virgil has trans-
migrated into his own breast. But the funniest sight of all 
[ 71 J 

THE PRAISE 0F FOLLY 
is to see them admiring and praising each other, trading 
compliment for compliment, thus mutually scratching 
each other's itch. Yet if one commits a lapse in a single 
word, and another more quick-sighted by happy chance 
lights on it, 0 Hercules, what a stir presently, what 
scuffiings, what insults, what invectives! May I have the 
ill-will of the whole grammatical world, if I lie. I used to 
know a certain polymath versed in Greek, Latin, math-
ematics, philosophy, and medicine, and a master of them 
all, then some sixty years old; laying aside all the others, 
he vexed and tortured himself with grammar for more 
than twenty years, deeming that he would be happy if he 
were allowed to live until he had settled with certainty 
how the eight parts of speech are to be distinguished, a 
thing which none of the Greeks or Latins succeeded in 
doing definitively. It becomes a matter to be put to the 
test of battle, when someone makes a conjunction of a 
word which belongs in the bailiwick of the adverbs. 
Thanks to this, there are as many grammars as there are 
grammarians-nay, more; for my friend Aldus single-
handed produced grammars on more than five occasions. 
He has overlooked no work of the kind, however bar-
barously and tediously written; he has expounded each, 
and criticized each; jealous of everybody who may be 
toiling, however ineptly, in the same field, and pitiably in 
fear that, with some one else snatching the glory, his 
labor of many years will be lost. Do you prefer to call this 
madness or folly? It is no great matter to me; only con-
fess that it is done with my assistance; so that a creature 
otherwise by far the most wretched of all is raised to such 
happiness that he would not wish to exchange his lot for 
that of the kings of Persia. 
[ 72 J 

POETS AND RHETORICIANS 
The poets owe less to me, though by their 'own avowal 
they are of my faction, being a race of free souls (as the 
proverb has it), all of whose efforts tend to no other end 
than soothing the ears of fools with vapid trifles and silly 
stories. And yet they so rely on these things, strange to 
say, that they not only promise themselves immortality, 
and a life equal to that of the gods, but they also assure 
as much to others. Philautia and Kolakia are more in-
timate with this fraternity than with others, nor am I 
worshipped by any tribe of men more sincerely or with 
greater constancy. As for the rhetoricians, though they 
sometimes play both sides against the middle, and col-
lude with the philosophers, they are also of my party, on 
many counts, although this chiefly proves it: besides 
much other nonsense, they have written so critically and 
so much on the method of joking. Whoever he was who 
wrote the art of rhetoric Ad Herennium includes folly itself 
as one species of humor; and in the work of Quintilian, 
easily the prince of this realm, there is a chapter longer 
than the Iliad on the subject of raising laughter. In gen-
eral they allow this much to folly, that many times what 
cannot be refuted by arguments can be parried by 
laughter. But you may think that exciting laughter by 
witty remarks, and this by a set method, does not belong 
to Folly. 
[261 Of the same brand also are those who pursue 
fame by turning out books. All of them are highly in-
debted to me, but especially those who blacken paper 
with sheer triviality. For the ones who write learnedly 
for the verdict of a few scholars, not ruling out even a 
Persius or a Laelius as judge, seem to me more pitiable 
than happy, since they continuously torture themselves: 
[ 78 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
they add, they alter, they blot something out, they put it 
back in, they do their work over, they recast it, they 
show it to friends, they keep it for nine years; yet they 
never satisfy themselves. At such a price they buy an 
empty reward, namely, praise-and that the praise of a 
handful. They buy it with such an expense of long hours, 
so much loss of that sweetest of all things, sleep, so much 
sweat, so many vexations. Add also the loss of health, the 
wreck of their good looks, weakness of eyes or even blind-
ness, poverty, malice, denial of pleasures, premature old 
age, and early death-and if there are other things like 
these, add them. The scholar considers himself com-
pensated for such ills when he wins the approbation of one 
or two other weak-eyed scholars. But my author is crazy 
in a far happier way, since without any prolonged 
thought he quickly puts in writing whatever has come 
into his head or chanced to his pen, even his dreams; and 
all this with little waste of paper, knowing that if the 
trifles he has written are trivial enough the greater num-
ber of readers-that is, the fools and ignoramuses-will 
approve. Of what consequence is it to ignore the two or 
three scholars, even if they chance to read the work? Or 
what weight will the censure of a few learned men have, 
as against the great multitude of those who will shout 
acclaim? 
But the wiser writers are those who put out the work of 
others as their own. By a few strokes of the pen they trans-
fer to their own account the glory which was the fruit of 
much toil on another's part, drawing comfort from the 
thought that even if it should happen that they are pub• 
licly convicted of plagiarism, meanwhile they shall have 
enjoyed for a period the emoluments of authorship. It is 
[H] 

THE LITERARY SET 
worth one's while to see how pleased authors are with 
themselves when they are popular, and pointed out in a 
crowd-"There is a celebrity!" Their work is on display 
in booksellers' shops, with three cryptic words in large 
type on the title-page, preferably foreign words, some-
thing like a magician's spell. Ye gods! What are all these 
things but words, after all? Few people will ever hear of 
them, in comparison with the total population of the 
world, and far fewer will admire them, since there is such 
divergence of tastes, even among the vulgar. And why 
is it that the very names of the authors are often invented, 
or taken from the books of the ancients? One of them 
likes to sign himself Telemachus, another Stelenus or 
La.ertes, this one Polycrates, that one Thrasymachus; so 
that nowadays it matters not if you ascribe your book to 
a chameleon or a gourd, or simply to alpha or beta, as the 
philosophers have a way of doing. 
The daintiest thing is when they compliment each 
other, turn about, in an exchange of letters, verses, and 
puffs; fools praising fools and dunces praising dunces. The 
first, in the opinion of the second, is an Alcaeus; the 
second, in the opinion of the first, is a Callimachus. One 
puts another far above Cicero; the other then finds the 
one more learned than Plato. Or sometimes they will pick 
out a competitor and increase their reputation through 
rivalry with him. As a result, the doubtful public is split 
into opposing camps, until, when the battle is well over, 
each leaves the field as victor and each has a triumphal 
parade. Wise men deride all this as most foolish, as in-
deed it is. Who denies it? But meanwhile, by my boon 
our authors lead a sweet life, nor would they exchange 
their triumphs for those of the Scipios. And while the 
[ 75 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
scholars indeed have a great deal of fun laughing at them, 
and savor to the full the madnesses of others, they them-
selves owe a good deal to me, which they cannot disavow 
without being the most ungrateful of men. 
[27] Among men of learned professions, the lawyers 
may claim first place for themselves, nor is there any 
other class quite so self-satisfied; for while they indus-
triously roll up the stone of Sisyphus by dint of weaving 
together six hundred laws in the same breath, no matter 
how little to the purpose, and by dint of piling glosses 
upon glosses and opinions upon opinions, they contrive 
to make their profession seem the most difficult of all. 
What is really tedious commends itself to them as bril-
liant. Let us put in with them the logicians and sophists, 
a breed of men more loquacious than the famed brass 
kettles at Dodona; any one of them can out-chat twenty 
picked women. They would be happier, however, if they 
were merely talkative, and not quarrelsome as well, to 
such a degree that they will stubbornly cut and thrust 
over a lock of goat's wool, quite losing track ofthe truth in 
question while they go on disputing. Their self-love makes 
them happy, and equipped with three syllogisms they will 
unhesitatingly dare to join battle upon any subject with 
any man. Mere frowardness brings them back unbeaten, 
though you match Stentor against them. 
Near these march the scientists, reverenced for their 
beards and the fur on their gowns, who teach that they 
alone are wise while the rest of mortal men flit about as 
shadows. How pleasantly they dote, indeed, while they 
construct their numberless worlds, and measure the sun, 
moon, stars, and spheres as with thumb and line. They 
assign causes for lightning, winds, eclipses, and other in-
[ 76 J 

SCIENTIFIC FOLLIES 
explicable things, never hesitating a whit, as if they were 
privy to the secrets of nature, artificer: of things, or as if 
they visited 'us fresh from the council of the gods. Yet all 
the while nature is laughing grandly at them and their 
conjectures. For to prove that they have good intelligence 
of nothing, this is a sufficient argument: they can never 
explain why they disagree with each other on every sub-
ject. Thus knowing nothing in general, they profess to 
know all things in particular; though they are ignorant 
even of themselves, and on occasion do not see the ditch 
or the stone lying across their path, because many of them 
are blear-eyed or absent-minded; yet they proclaim that 
they perceive ideas, universals, forms without matter, 
primary substances, quiddities, and ecceities-things so 
tenuous, I fear, that Lynceus himself could not see them. 
When they especially disdain the vulgar crowd is when 
they bring out their triangles, quadrangles, circles, and 
mathematical pictures of the sort, lay one upon the other, 
intertwine them into a maze, then deploy some letters as 
if in line of battle, and presently do it over in reverse 
order-and all to involve the uninitiated in darkness. 
Their fraternity does not lack those who predict future 
events by consulting the stars, and promise wonders even 
more magical; and these lucky scientists find people to 
believe them. 
[28) Perhaps it were better to pass over the theologians 
in silence, and not to move such a Lake Camarina, or to 
handle such an herb Anagyris foetida, as that marvellously 
supercilious and irascible race. For they may attack me 
with six hundred arguments, in squadrons, and drive me 
to make a recantation; which if I refuse, they will straight-
way proclaim me an heretic. By this thunderbolt they are 
[ 77 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
wont to terrify any toward whom they are ill-disposed. 
No other people are so loth to acknowledge my favors to 
them; yet the divines are bound to me by no ordinary 
obligations. They are happy in their self-love, and as if 
they already inhabited the third heaven they look down 
from a height on all other mortal men as on creatures 
that crawl on the ground, and they come near to pitying 
them. They are protected by a wall of scholastic defini-
tions, arguments, corollaries, implicit and explicit prop-
ositions; they have so many hideaways that they could 
not be caught even by the net of Vulcan; for they slip out 
on their distinctions, by which also they cut through all 
knots as easily as with a double-bitted axe from Tenedos; 
and they abound with newly-invented terms and pro-
digious vocables. Furthermore, they explain as pleases 
them the most arcane matters, such as by what method 
the world was founded and set in order, through what 
conduits original sin has been passed down along the 
generations, by what means, in what measure, and how 
long the perfect Christ was in the Virgin's womb, and 
how accidents subsist in the Eucharist without their 
subject. 
But those are hackneyed. Here are questions worthy 
of the great and (as some call them) illuminated theo-
logians, questions to make them prick up their ears-if 
ever they chance upon them. Whether divine generation 
took place at a particular time? Whether there are several 
sonships in Christ? Whether this is a possible proposition: 
God the Father hates the Son? Whether God could have 
taken upon Himself the likeness of a woman? Or of a 
devil? Of an ass? Of a gourd? Of a piece of flint? Then 
how would that gourd have preached, performed mir-
[ 78 J 

THEOLOGICAL FOLLIES 
acles, or been crucified? Also, what would Peter have 
consecrated if he had administered the sacrament while 
Christ's body hung upon the Cross? Also whether at that 
moment Christ could be said to be a man? And whether 
after the resurrection it will be forbidden to eat and 
drink? (Now, while there is time, they are providing 
against hunger and thirst!) These finespun trifles are 
numberless, with others even more subtle, having to do 
with instants of time, notions, relations, accidents, quid-
dities, entities, which no one can perceive with his eyes 
unless, like Lynceus, he can see in blackest darkness 
things that are not there. 
We must put in also those hard sayings, contradictions 
indeed, compared to which the Stoic maxims which were 
called paradoxes seem the merest simplicity. For in-
stance: it is less of a crime to cut the throats of a thousand 
men than to set a stitch on a poor man's shoe on the 
Lord's day; it is better to choose that the universe should 
perish, body, boots, and breeches (as the saying is), than 
that one should tell a single lie, however inconsequential. 
The methods our scholastics pursue only render more 
subtle these subtlest of subtleties; for you will escape from 
a labyrinth more quickly than from the tangles of Real-
ists, Nominalists, Thomists, Albertists, Occamists, Scot-
ists-1 have not named all, but the chief ones only. But 
in all these sects there is so much learning and so much 
difficulty that I should think the apostles themselves must 
needs have the help of some other spirit if they were to 
try disputing on these topics with our new generation of 
theologues. 
Paul could exhibit faith; but when he said, "Faith is 
the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things 
[ 79 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
not seen," he did not define it doctorally. The same 
apostle, though he exemplified charity supremely well, 
divided and defined it with very little logical skill in his 
first epistle to the Corinthians, Chapter 13. And no doubt 
the apostles consecrated the Eucharist devoutly enough; 
but suppose you had questioned them about the terminus 
a quo and the terminus ad quem, or about transubstantia-
tion-how the body is in many places at once, the differ-
ence between the body of Christ when in heaven, when 
on the Cross, when in the sacrament of the Eucharist, 
about the point when transubstantiation occurs (seeing 
that the prayer effecting it is a discrete quantity having 
extension in time)-they would not have answered with 
the same acuteness, I suggest, with which the sons of 
Scotus distinguish and define these matters. The apostles 
knew the mother of Jesus, but who among them has 
demonstrated philosophically just how she was kept clear 
from the sin of Adam, as our theologians have done? 
Peter received the keys, received them from One who did 
not commit them to an unworthy person, and yet I doubt 
that he ever understood-for Peter never did attain to 
subtlety-that a person who did not have knowledge 
could have the key to knowledge. They went about bap-
tizing everywhere, and yet they never taught what is the 
formal, the material, the efficient, and the final cause of 
baptism, nor is mention made by them that it has both a 
delible character and an indelible one. They worshipped, 
to be sure, but in spirit, following no other teaching than 
that of the Gospel, "God is a spirit, and they that wor-
ship Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth." It 
seems never to have been revealed to them that a picture 
drawn with charcoal on a wall ought to be worshipped 
[ 80 J 

THE UNSUBTLE APOSTLES 
with the same worship as Christ himself-at least if it is 
drawn with two fingers outstretched and the hair un-
shorn, and has three sets of rays in the nimbus fastened to 
the back of the head. For who would comprehend these 
things if he had not consumed all of thirty-six years upon 
the physics and metaphysics of Aristotle and the Scotists? 
In similar wise, the apostles preach grace, and yet they 
never determined what the difference is between grace 
freely given and grace that makes one deserving. They 
urge us to good works, but do not separate work, work 
working, and work that has been worked. At all times 
they inculcate charity, but do not distinguish charity 
which is infused from that which is acquired, or explain 
whether charity is an accident or a substance, created or 
uncreated. They abhor sin, but may I be shot if they 
could define scientifically what it is we call sin, unless 
they had the luck to be instructed by the spirit of the 
Scotists. 
You can never make me believe that Paul, by whose 
learning you can judge that of the others, would so often 
have condemned questions, disputes, genealogies, and 
what he called "strifes of words," if he had really been a 
master of those subtleties, especially in view of the fact 
that all the controversies of that time were mere little 
backwoods debates, quite without art, when put into 
comparison with the more than Chrysippean subtleties 
of Our Masters. And yet these masters are as modest as 
can be; for if by chance something was written by the 
apostles carelessly or not quite doctorally, they do not 
damn it out of hand, but give it a proper interpretation. 
Thus much honor they pay, partly to the antiquity of the 
passage and partly to the apostolic authority. And dear 
[ 81 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
me, it would be almost unjust to look for very scholarly 
things from the apostles, for they heard no word about 
them from their Master. But if a lapse of the same kind 
turns up in Chrysostom, Basil, or Jerome, it is enough for 
our scholars to jot down, "It is not accepted." 
The apostles also confuted the heathen philosophers 
and the Jews, who are by nature the stubbornest of all, 
but they did so rather by their lives and miracles than by 
syllogisms; and of course they dealt with people not one 
of whom had wit enough to get through a single quodlibet 
of Scotus. Nowadays, what heathen or heretic does not 
yield at once in the face of these finespun subtleties? Un-
less, indeed, he is so dull that he cannot follow them or so 
impudent that he hisses them down, or possibly so well 
instructed in the same equivocations that the contest is 
an equal one. Then it is as if you were to match one 
magician against another, or as if someone with a 
charmed sword should fight with a man whose sword also 
happened to be charmed. It would be nothing but re-
weaving the web of Penelope. In my poor judgment 
Christians would be wiser if instead of their gross un-
wieldy battalions of soldiers, with which for some time 
now they have been warring without any particular favor 
from Mars, they would send against the Turks and 
Saracens these brawling Scotists and stubborn Occam-
ists and invincible Albertists, along with the whole band 
of Sophists. Then, I am bold to think, they would witness 
a battle which would be the merriest ever fought, and a 
victory such as was never seen before. Who is so phleg-
matic that the shrewdness of these fighters would not 
excite him? Who so stupid that such sophistries would not 
[ 82 J 

IMPUDENT DIVINES 
quicken him? Who so quick-sighted that they would not 
throw a mist before his eyes? 
[29) But it seems to you I say all these things almost as 
a joke. No wonder, indeed, since among the divines them-
selves are some, instructed in sound learning, who are 
nauseated by what they deem the frivolous subtleties of 
theologues. There are those who abhor as a kind of sac-
rilege, and class as the greatest impiety, this speaking 
with unclean lips about holy things, which are rather to 
be worshipped than expounded; this disputing by the 
profane methods of the heathen; this arrogant way of de-
fining; this defilement of the majesty of sacred theology 
by silly, sordid terms and sentiments. Yet for all that, the 
others please and even applaud themselves in their hap-
piness, so busied night and day about their precious 
bagatelles that not enough time is left to allow them to 
open a gospel or the epistles of Paul. And while they 
fribble thus in the schools, they deem that they are hold-
ing up the universal church, otherwise about to fall in 
ruins, by the props of their syllogisms, exactly as Atlas, 
according to the poets, holds up the heavens on his shoul-
ders. You can imagine how much pleasure it gives them 
to shape and reshape the Holy Scriptures as if they were 
made of wax; to demand that their own conclusions, sub-
scribed to by a few schoolmen, shall be accounted greater 
than Solon's laws and preferred before a pope's decrees; 
and as censors of the world to force a retraction of any-
thing that does not square, to a line, with their implicit 
as well as explicit conclusions. And these they announce 
like oracles. "This proposition is scandalous." "This one 
is lacking in reverence." "This savors of heresy." "This 
does not have the right ring." The inference is that 
c 88 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
neither baptism nor the gospel nor Paul and Peter, nor 
Saints Jerome and Augustine, nay, not even the great 
Aristotelitotical Thomas himself, can make a Christian 
unless the vote of these baccalaureate sirs has been added 
as well. And what nicety in passing judgment! Who 
would ever have thought, if these wise men had not in-
structed us, that a man who approves as good Latin both 
matula putes and matula putet, or both ollaefervere and ollam 
fervere, is not a Christian? Who else would have purged 
the church from black errors of this sort-which no one 
would ever have had occasion to read about if these wise 
men had not published them under the great seals of their 
universities? Forsooth, are they not happy while they do 
these things? 
Furthermore, they draw exact pictures of every part of 
hell as if they had spent many years in that common-
wealth. They also fabricate new heavenly spheres as fancy 
dictates, adding the biggest of all and the finest-for there 
must be a suitable place for the souls of the blessed to take 
their walks in, to entertain at dinner, or even to play a 
game of ball. Their heads are so stuffed and stretched with 
these and two thousand other whim-whams of the same 
sort that I am sure Jupiter's cerebrum was not any more 
gravid when he yelled for Vulcan's help to bring forth 
Pallas. Wherefore do not be astonished when you see at a 
public disputation the head of one of them all bound 
round with swathes, for otherwise it would certainly fly 
to pieces. I often get a good laugh myself when these 
theologians that loom up so vast in their own eyes begin 
speaking in their slovenly and barbarous idiom and 
jabber so that no one except a jabberer can understand 
them, reaching a pitch-"highest acumen" they call it-
[ 84 J 

THEOLOGUES AND MONKS 
whereto the vulgar cannot climb. For they affirm that it 
suits not with the dignity of sacred discourse to be forced 
to obey the rules of grammarians. 0 marvellous prerog-
ative of theologians, if to speak incorrectly is reserved to 
them alone! When the fact is that they share the distinc-
tion with most tinkers! Lastly, they consider themselves 
as next-door neighbors to the gods when they are ad-
dressed as "Our Masters," with almost religious rever-
ence, in which title they fancy there lies such virtue as 
was in the "ineffable Four Letters" of the Hebrews. And 
going a little further, they say it is a sacrilege ever to write 
MAGISTER NOSTER except in capital letters; and if a 
person should happen to say noster magister, he has de-
stroyed at one stroke all the majesty of the theological 
order. 
[30] Coming nearest to these in felicity are the men 
who generally call themselves "the religious" and 
"monks"-utterly false names both, since most of them 
keep as far away as they can from religion and no people 
are more in evidence in every sort of place. But I do not 
see how anything could be more dismal than these monks 
if I did not succor them in many ways. For though people 
as a whole so detest this race of men that meeting one by 
accident is supposed to be bad luck, yet they flatter them-
selves to the qucen's taste. For one thing, they reckon it 
the highest degree of piety to have no contact with liter-
ature, and hence they see to it that they do not know how 
to read. For another, when with asinine voices they bray 
out in church those psalms they have learned, by rote 
rather than by heart, they are convinced that they are 
anointing God's ears with the blandest of oil. Some of 
them make a good profit from their dirtiness and men-
[ 85 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
dicancy, collecting their food from door to door with 
importunate bellowing; nay, there is not an inn, public 
conveyance, or ship where they do not intrude, to the 
great disadvantage of the other common beggars. Yet 
according to their account, by their very dirtiness, ig-
norance, want of manners, and insolence, these delight-
ful fellows are representing to us the lives of the apostles. 
What is funnier than to find that they do everything by 
rule, employing, as it were, the methods of mathematics; 
and to slip up is a great crime. There must be just so 
many knots for each shoe and the shoe-string must be of a 
certain color; the habit must be decked with just so much 
trimming; the girdle must be of a certain material and 
the width of so many straws; the cowl of a certain shape 
and a certain number of bushels in capacity; the hair so 
many fingers long; and one must sleep just so many hours. 
Who does not see that all this equality is really very un-
equal, in view of the great diversity of bodies and tem-
peraments? Yet on the basis of such details they hold 
other people as mere nutshells. What is more, the mem-
bers of one order, amid all their professions of apostolic 
charity, will turn and condemn the members of some 
other, making an admirable hubbub over the way their 
habit is belted or the slightly darker color of it. Among 
the monks you will see some so rigorously pious that they 
will wear no outer garment unless it be of Cilician goat's 
hair, while their inner garment is of Milesian wool; some 
others, on the contrary, are linen on the outside, but still 
wool underneath. Members of certain orders start back 
from the mere touch of a piece of money as if it were 
aconite. They do not, however, withdraw from the touch 
of a glass of wine, or of a woman. In short, all orders take 
[ 86 J 

GOOD WORKS OF MONKS 
remarkable care that nothing in their way of life shall be 
consistent; nor is it so much their concern to be like Christ 
as to be unlike each other. Thus a great part of their 
felicity derives from their various names. Those of one 
order delight to call themselves Cordeliers, but among 
them some are Coletes, some Minors, some Minims, some 
Crutched. Again, there are the Benedictines and the Ber-
nardines; the Bridgetines and the Augustinians; the Wil-
liamists and theJacobines; as if it were not enough to be 
called Christians. 
The greater number of them work so hard at their 
ceremonies and at maintaining the minutiae of tradition 
that they deem one heaven hardly a suitable reward for 
their labors; never recalling that the time will come when, 
with all these things held of no account, Christ will de-
mand a reckoning of that which He has prescribed, 
namely, charity. One friar will then show a paunch which 
has been padded out with every kind of fish; another will 
spill out a hundred bushels of hymns. Another will count 
off so many myriads of fasts, and will lay the blame for 
his almost bursting belly upon his having always broken 
his fasts by a single dinner. Another will point to a pile of 
ceremonies so big that seven ships could scarcely carry it. 
Another will boast that for sixty years he never touched 
money, except when his fingers were protected by two 
pairs of gloves. Another will wear a cowl so dirty and 
greasy that no sailor would deign to put it on. An-
other will celebrate the fact that for more than fifty-five 
years he lived the life of a sponge, always fastened to one 
spot. Another will show a voice grown hoarse with as-
siduous chanting; another, a lethargy contracted by liv-
ing alone; another, a tongue grown dumb under his vow 
r s7 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
of silence. But Christ, interrupting their boasts, which 
otherwise would go on endlessly, will say: "Whence 
comes this new race of Jews? I recognize one command-
ment which is truly mine, and of that I hear nothing. Of 
old in the sight of all men and using no device of parable 
I promised the inheritance of my Father, not to cowls, 
orisons, or fasts, but to works of charity. Nor do I acknowl-
edge those who acknowledge too well their own good 
works; let those that wish to seem holier than myself 
dwell, if they like, in those six hundred heavens of Basil-
ides, or let them command a new heaven to be built for 
themselves by the very ones whose petty traditions they 
have preferred above my commandments." When they 
shall hear these words and shall see common sailors and 
teamsters preferred above them, with what faces, think 
you, will they look wistfully on each other! Yet mean-
while, with some assistance from me, they are happy in 
their good hope. 
Yet nobody dares quite to scorn these people, though 
they are secluded from the life of the state; and least of 
all dares one scorn the mendicants, because they get hold 
of everybody's secrets by means of what they call confes-
sions. To be sure, they account it a crime to publish these, 
except as it may happen, when they are in drink, that 
they wish to have some fun telling good stories, and will 
divulge a mattet by hints, but suppressing, of course, the 
names. If anyone affronts these wasps, they will take suit-
able revenge in public sermons, and point out their enemy 
by indirect expressions so cunningly that no one will mis-
understand unless he understands nothing. Nor will they 
make an end of barking until you throw a sop into their 
mouths. 
[ 88 J 

MONKS AS PREACHERS 
[31] Tell me, w:hat comic actor or mountebank would 
you rather watch than these monks rhetoricizing in their 
sermons, droll in every aspect, but neatly exemplifying 
all the lore which rhetoricians have handed down con-
cerning the art of speaking. Good Lord! How they ges-
ticulate, how aptly they modulate the voice, how they 
intone, throw themselves about, suddenly put on a new 
face, and confuse all things by their bawling! And this 
art of speaking is passed on traditionally from monk to 
brother monk as if it were a great craft and mystery. It is 
not lawful for me to know it, but I shall proceed with a 
few conjectures. They commence with an invocation, a 
trick which they have borrowed from the poets. Next, if 
they are to speak of charity, say, they begin their exor-
dium with the river Nile in Egypt. Or if they arc to ex-
pound the mystery of the Cross, they very happily take a 
start from Baal, the Babylonian snake-god. If they are to 
disc1,1ss fasting, they set out from the twelve signs of the 
Zodiac; orif they are to speak on faith, they make a few 
preliminary remarks on squaring the circle. 
I have heard of a certain notable fool-there I go 
again! I meant to say scholar-who was about to explain 
the mystery of the Holy Trinity before a very distin-
guished audience. In order that he might at once make a 
display of his uncommon learning and give special satis-
faction to the divines who were listening, he entered upon 
his matter in a completely new way-that is, from letters, 
syllables, and words; then from the agreement of noun 
and verb, of adjective and noun; while everybody was 
lost in wonder and some were murmuring to themselves 
that phrase from Horace, "What is all this stink about?" 
However, he drew out this observation, that in the ele-
C 89 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
ments of grammar he could show a symbol of the Holy 
Trinity, set forth so plainly that no mathematician could 
diagram it more clearly in the sand. And this superlative 
divine had so sweated and toiled on this sermon for the 
previous eight months that today he is as blind as a mole, 
all the sharpness of his sight having been exhausted, I 
fancy, to give edge to his wit. But the man does not be-
grudge his blindness, reckoning it a small price for the 
purchase of so much glory. 
I heard another, a man of eighty years, and such a 
theologian that you would have thought Scotus reborn 
in his person. He was to explain the mystery of the name 
Jesus, and he showed with admirable subtlety that in the 
letters of the name was hidden everything that could be 
said about Him. The circumstance that the name is in-
flected in but three cases gives us a plain symbol of the 
threefold nature of God. Then the fact that in one case 
the name jesus ends with s, in the second case it ends with 
m, and in the third with u lies an ineffable mystery, to 
wit, the three letters show that He is the sum, the middle, 
and the ultimate. There remained a still more abstruse 
mystery in these letters treated mathematically; he di-
vided the name jesus into two equal parts in such a way 
that a fifth of it (the letters) was left in the middle; then 
he pointed out that this letter among the Hebrews is t:', 
which they call Schin, or Sin; and that "sin" in the Scot-
tish tongue, as he recalled, means peccatum. And from this 
he was able to declare in the sight of all men that it is 
Jesus who takes away the sin of the world! All his gaping 
hearers, and especially the theologues, were so struck 
with admiration of this new approach to the subject that 
what happened to Niobe came near to overtaking them; 
[90] 

THE PARTS OF A SERMON 
though for my own part I came still nearer to imitating 
that shoddy Priapus who to his own great hurt witnessed 
the nocturnal rites of Canidia and Sagana. And with 
reason; for when did the Greek Demosthenes or the 
Roman Cicero ever cook up a rhetorical insinuation like 
that? They held that an introduction was faulty if it began 
too far from the matter itself, which, in fact, is the very 
way of beginning used by swineherds, who have mere 
nature for their guide. But these learned preachers con-
sider that their preamble, for so they call it, will be em-
inently rhetorical only so far as it has no bearing upon 
the rest of the argument, to the end that the admiring 
auditor may murmur to himself, "Now what is he getting 
at?" 
As a third step, by way of a substitute for a narration, 
they explain some bit from a Gospel, but hastily and by 
the way, as it were, when in fact it is the one thing they 
ought to drive home. For the fourth part, assuming a new 
character, they thresh over some question of divinity, 
relating, many times, to nothing on earth or in heaven; 
but such they suppose peculiarly to belong to their art. 
Here they rise to the height of theological majesty, sound-
ing in the ears of the audience those august titles of 
Illustrious Doctor, Subtle Doctor, Supersubtle Doctor, 
Seraphic Doctor, Holy Doctor, Invincible Doctor. Then 
they bandy about, before an uneducated crowd, their 
syllogisms, majors, minors, conclusions, corollaries, con-
versions, and such bloodless and more than scholastic 
pedantry. There remains the fifth act, in which the 
proper thing is to exhibit the highest artistry. Here they 
bring in some silly and popular story drawn, I judge, 
from the Speculum Historiale or Gesta Romanorum, and in-
[ 91 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
terpret it allegorically, tropologically, and anagogically. 
And in this fashion they complete their chimera, one 
which Horace could not even approach when he wrote, 
Humano capite, etc. 
But they have heard from some authorities, I know not 
which ones, that the beginning of a speech should be calm 
and not at all loud. Hence they start speaking their ex-
ordium in such a tone that they cannot hear their own 
voice, as if it did some good to speak what no one can 
catch. They have also been given to understand that to 
move the emotions one should use exclamations and a 
loud voice. Hence, although otherwise they have been 
going along with voice lowered, they now and then raise 
their voice on a sudden, with a furious roar, even when 
there is no occasion. You would swear that the man 
needed a dose of ipecac, except that the way he howls 
nothing would help him. Furthermore, because they have 
heard that as the sermon proceeds it should become more 
fervent, you notice that in scattered passages, no matter 
how the opening sections have been delivered, they em-
ploy a marvellous vehemency of voice, even when the 
subject-matter at those points is commonplace; and so at 
length they come to a close in a manner to make you 
think they are out of breath. 
Lastly, they have learned that among the rhetoricians 
something is said about laughter, and they are eager to 
arouse it, sprinkling a jest here and there. And 0 golden 
Aphrodite! so gracefully turned, so apropos, that you 
would have to cry, "The ass is at the lyre!" They also try 
a bit of satire, but they tickle rather than wound; nor are 
they ever more soothing than when they mean to give the 
appearance of speaking with the greatest freedom. One 
[ 92 J 

THE PREACHER'S SUCCESS 
more thing: their action is such that you would swear 
they had learned it from strolling players, though they 
fall far short of their teachers. Still each is so like the other 
that no one can doubt that the preachers learned from 
the players, or else the players learned their rhetoric from 
the preachers. And yet our preachers meet with some-
and here I get in my work-who, when they listen to 
them, judge that they are hearing an absolute Demos-
thenes or Cicero. Most of this sort are either merchants 
or women, whose ears only the preachers study to please, 
because the merchants, if they are stroked the right way, 
are wont to pass over a little dividend of booty from their 
ill-gotten goods; and as to the women, though for many 
reasons they befriend the order, it is principally because 
they are accustomed to weep on their shoulders if for any 
reason they are at outs with their husbands. And now I 
am sure you perceive how much is owed to me by this 
class of men, who with their ceremonials and silly 
pedantries and bawling exercise a kind of despotism over 
mortal men, and believe themselves to be Pauls and 
Anthonies. 
[32] In truth I am glad to get away from these actors 
and dissemblers, who are as ungrateful for my benefits as 
they are false in their pretensions to piety. And at this 
point it pleases me to touch upon kings and nobles of the 
court, by whom I am worshipped sincerely and, as be-
comes gentlemen, frankly. And indeed, if they had so 
much as half an ounce of sound wisdom, what life were 
more dismal than theirs or more to be avoided? For let 
a person weigh in his mind how heavy a burden rests on 
the shoulders of anyone wishing to act the true prince, 
and he will not conclude that sovereignty is a thing worth 
c 98 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
using perjury and parricide to gain. He will consider that 
one who grasps the helm of great affairs must further the 
public, not his private, interest and give his mind to noth· 
ing e.xcept as it concerns the general good; he must not 
deviate a finger's breadth from. the laws of which he is 
author and executor; he must himself be warrant for the 
integrity of all officials and magistrates; he is one person 
who is exposed to all eyes, and like a favorable star he has 
power, by the good influence of his conduct, to bring sal-
vation in human affairs; or like a fatal comet he may 
bring destruction in his train. The vices of other men are 
not so deeply felt or so widely communicated. A prince 
is in such a position that if he lapses ever so slightly from 
honesty, straightway a dangerous and vital infection 
spreads to many people. Then the lot of princes brings 
with it a host of things which tend to lead them from 
righteousness, such as pleasure, liberty, adulation, and 
excess; so that he must endeavor more earnestly and 
watch more vigilantly lest, beguiled by these, he fail of 
his duty. Finally, to say nothing of treasons, hatreds, and 
other perils or dreads, there stands above his own crown 
that true King who will call him to account for even 
the least of his trespasses; and the accounting will be 
the more severe as the empire he ruled was the more 
mighty. I say that if the prince weighed these things, and 
many more like them, within himself-and he would do 
so, were he wise-1 am afraid he could neither sleep nor 
eat in any joy. 
But as it is, with my assistance, kings leave all these 
concerns to the gods, take care of themselves nicely, and 
grant no hearing to anyone unless he knows how to speak 
pleasant things, because solicitude must not get a foot-
[ 94 J 

THE KING'S TRAPPINGS 
hold in their minds. They believe they have played the 
part of a sovereign to the hilt if they diligently go hunting, 
feed some fine horses, sell dignities and offices at a profit to 
themselves, and daily devise new measures by which to 
drain away the wealth of citizens and sweep it into their 
own exchequer. All this, of course, is done in due form, 
under new-found names, so that even when most unjust 
it shall carry some appearance of equity; and they take 
care to add a little sweetening so that in any event they 
may secure for themselves the hearts of the people. Fash-
ion me now a man such as princes commonly are, a man 
ignorant of the laws, almost an enemy of the public wel-
fare, intent upon private gain, addicted to pleasure, a 
hater of learning, a hater, too, of liberty and truth, think-
ing about anything except the safety of the state, and 
measuring all things by his own desire and profit. Then 
put on him a golden chain, symbolizing the union of all 
virtues linked together; set on him a crown adorned with 
gems, which is to remind him that he ought to surpass 
others in every heroic quality. In addition, give him a 
scepter, emblem of justice and of a heart in no way cor-
rupted, and finally a scarlet robe, badge of a certain 
eminent love for the realm. If a prince really laid his own 
life alongside these symbols, I believe he would have the 
grace to be ashamed of his finery. He would be afraid 
some nosy satirist might turn the whole spectacle, suited 
as it is for high tragedy, into laughter and derision. 
Now what shall I say about the noble courtiers? 
Though nothing is more venal, more servile, ·more wit-
less, or more contemptible than most of them, yet they 
desire to seem the foremost of created things. Here is one 
point, however, in which they are as modest as one could 
[ 95 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
wish: they are satisfied to carry about on their bodies 
gold, gems, scarlet, and the other insignia of wisdom and 
the virtues, but the reality of these they leave for the use 
of others. They find themselves abundantly happy in 
being allowed to speak of the king as "our master," in 
having learned how to turn a compliment in three words, 
and in knowing how to repeat on occasion those cour-
teous titles of Your Grace, Your Lordship, and Your 
Majesty; in having cast off shame beyond other men, and 
in flattering handsomely. For these are the arts which 
truly become the nobleman and courtier. For the rest, if 
you look more closely at their whole way of life, you are 
sure to find them "mere Phaeacians, suitors of Penelope, 
and"-you know the rest of the verse, which Echo can 
give you better than I. They sleep until noon, when a 
hired chaplain comes to their bedside and swiftly runs 
through matins before they are half up. Then to break-
fast, which is barely got through when dinner-time comes 
along. Mter dinner come dice, checkers, cards, jesters, 
fools, whores, dalliance, and horse-play. Meanwhile there 
must be a round or two of drinks. Then back to supper, 
with toasts after it-notjust a toast, by Jove! And in this 
fashion do their hours, days, months, years, and lives 
glide away with no boredom. For myself it is as good as a 
hearty meal to watch these high-flyers, observing how 
every one of the ladies will think herself nearer to gods 
the longer train she trails; while one of the noblemen will 
shove past another by using his elbow, in order that he 
may seem to stand a little closer to Jove; and each is the 
more pleased with himself the heavier chain he can carry 
about on his neck, as if he were showing off his strength 
rather than his wealth. 
[ 96 J 

BISHOPS AND CARDINALS 
[33] Our popes, cardinals, and bishops for some time 
now have earnestly copied the state and practice of 
princes, and come near to beating them at their own 
game. Let a bishop but consider what his alb, the white 
emblem of sincerity, should teach him, namely, a life in 
every way blameless; and what is signified on his part by 
the two-horned miter, the two peaks bound by the same 
knot-I suppose it is a perfect knowledge of the Old and 
New Testaments; what is meant by covering his hands 
with gloves, a clean administration of the sacrament and 
one unsullied by any taint of human concerns; what the 
crozier symbolizes, most watchful care of the flock put 
under his charge; what is indicated by the cross that is 
carried before him, to wit, a victory over all carnal affec-
tions. If he would contemplate these and other lessons of 
the sort, I say, would he not lead a sad and troubled life? 
But as it is, they do well enough by way of feeding them-
selves; as for the other, the care of the sheep, they dele-
gate that to Christ himself, or else refer it to their suffra-
gans, as they call them, or other deputies. Nor do they 
keep in mind the name they bear, or what the word 
"bishop" means-labor, vigilance, solicitude. Yet in 
raking in moneys they truly play the bishop, overseeing 
everything-and overlooking nothing. 
In a similar way the cardinals, if they considered the 
fact that they have succeeded to the places of the apostles, 
would see that the same works are required of them as 
were performed by their predecessors; that they are not 
lords, but stewards, of spiritual things, and that shortly 
they are to render an exact account of what they hold in 
trust. Yes, let them too philosophize a bit concerning 
their vestments, and question themselves in this fashion: 
c 97 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
"What does the whiteness of this upper garment mean? 
Is it not a notable and singular purity of heart? What the 
crimson lower garment? Is it not a burning love of God? 
What, again, that outer robe flowing down in broad folds 
and spreading over the mule of his Exalted Reverence, 
though it would suffice to cover a camel? Is it not charity 
ample enough to embrace all men in its helpfulness, by 
way of teaching, exhorting, chastising, admonishing, end-
ing wars, resisting wicked princes, and freely spending 
blood-not money alone-for the flock of Christ? And 
wherefore all this money, anyway, for those who hold the 
places of the needy apostles?" If they would weigh these 
things, I repeat, they would not be so ambitious for the 
post, and would willingly give it up, or at least they would 
lead a toilsome and watchful life of the sort lived by those 
ancient apostles. 
As to these Supreme Pontiffs who take the place of 
Christ, if they tried to emulate His life, I mean His 
poverty, labors, teaching, cross, and contempt for safety, 
if even they thought upon the title of Pope-that is, 
Father-or the addition "Most Holy," who on earth 
would be more afflicted? Who would purchase that seat 
at the price of every resource and effort? Or who defend 
it, when purchased, by the sword, by poison, or by any-
thing else? Were wisdom to descend upon them, how it 
would inconvenience them! Wisdom, did I say? Nay, 
even a grain of salt would do it-a grain of that salt which 
is spoken of by Christ. It would lose them all that wealth 
and honor, all those possessions, triumphal progresses, 
offices, dispensations, tributes, and indulgences; it would 
lose them so many horses, mules, and retainers; so many 
pleasures. (See how I have comprehended in a few words 
t: 98 J 

THE POPE'S JOLLY LIFE 
many marketsful, a great harvest, a wide ocean, of goods!) 
In place of these it would bring vigils, fasts, tears, prayers, 
sermons, studies, sighs, and a thousand troublesome tasks 
of the sort. Nor should we pass over the circumstance that 
all those copyists and notaries would be in want, as would 
all those advocates, promoters, secretaries, muleteers, 
grooms, bankers, and pimps-1 was about to add some-
thing more tender, though rougher, I am afraid, on the 
ears. In short, that great host of men which burdens-I 
beg your pardon, I mean adorns-the Roman See would 
beg for their bread. This would be inhuman and down-
right abominable, and, what is more accursed, those very 
princes of the church and true lights of the world would 
themselves be reduced to a staff and a wallet. 
As it is now, what labor turns up to be done they hand 
over to Peter and Paul, who have leisure for it. But the 
splendor and the pleasure they take care of personally. 
And so it comes about-by my doing, remember-that 
scarcely any kind of men live more softly or less oppressed 
with care; believing that they are amply acceptable to 
Christ if with a mystical and almost theatrical finery, 
with ceremonies, and with those titles of Beatitude and 
Reverence and Holiness, along with blessing and cursing, 
they perform the office of bishops. To work miracles is 
primitive and old-fashioned, hardly suited to our times; 
to instruct the people is irksome; to interpret the Holy 
Scriptures is pedantry; to pray is otiose; to shed tears is 
distressing and womanish; to live in poverty is sordid; to 
be beaten in war is dishonorable and less than worthy of 
one who will hardly admit kings, however great, to kiss 
his sacred foot; and finally, to die is unpleasant, to die on 
the cross a disgrace. 
[ 99 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
There remain only those weapons and sweet benedic-
tions of which Paul speaks, and the popes are generous 
enough with these: interdictions, excommunications, re-
excommunications, anathematizations, pictured damna-
tions, and the terrific lightning-bolt of the bull, which by 
its mere flicker sinks the souls of men below the floor of 
hell. And these most holy fathers in Christ, and vicars of 
Christ, launch it against no one with more spirit than 
against those who, at the instigation of the devil, try to 
impair or to subtract from the patrimony of Peter. Al-
though this saying of Peter's stands in the Gospel, "We 
have left all and followed Thee," yet they give the name 
of his patrimony to lands, towns, tribute, imposts, and 
moneys. On behalf of these things, inflamed by zeal for 
Christ, they fight with fire and sword, not without shed-
ding of Christian blood; and then they believe they have 
defended the. bride of Christ in apostolic fashion, having 
scattered what they are pleased to designate as "her 
enemies." As if the church had any enemies more pes-
tilential than impious pontiffs who by their silence allow 
Christ to be forgotten, who enchain Him by mercenary 
rules, adulterate His teaching by forced interpretations, 
and crucify Him afresh by their scandalous life! 
Now the Christian church was founded on blood, 
strengthened by blood, and augmented by blood; yet 
nowadays they carry on Christ's cause by the sword just 
as if He who defends His own by His own means had 
perished. And although war is so cruel a business that it 
befits beasts and not men, so frantic that poets feign it is 
sent with evil purpose by the Furies, so pestilential that it 
brings with it a general blight upon morals, so iniquitous 
that it is usually conducted by the worst bandits, so im-
C 1oo J 

WAR IS SANCTIFIED 
pious that it has no accord with Christ, yet our popes, 
neglecting all their other concerns, make it their only 
task. Here you will see feeble old men assuming the 
strength of youth, not shocked by the. expense or tired out 
by the labor, not at all discouraged, if only they may up-
set laws, religion, peace, and all humane usages, and 
turn them heels over head. Learned sycophants will be 
ofund who will give to this manifest madness the names 
of 1;eal, piety, and fortitude, devising a way whereby it is 
possible for a man to whip out his sword, stick it into the 
guts of his brother, and nonetheless dwell in that supreme 
charity which, according to Christ's precept, a Christian 
owes to his neighbor. Here I am at a loss as to whether 
certain bishops of the Germans furnished the popes the 
model for all this or took it from them. These bishops 
personally acted as colonels, laying by their garb, for-
getting about benedictions and other such formalities, as 
though they esteemed it cowardly and lacking. in de-
corum for a bishop to return his soul to God from any 
place but a battlefield. 
Then the mob of priests, forsooth, consider it a sac-
rilege to fall short of their prelates in holiness. 0 brave! 
They war on behalf of their right to tithe in the best mil-
itary manner, with swords, darts, stones, and force of 
arms. How keen-sighted they are, to elicit from the writ-
ings of the ancients something by which they can terrify 
the poor people and convince them that they owe more 
than their just tithes! Of course it does not occur to them 
that many things may be read in many scriptures touch-
ing the duty which they, on their side, should discharge 
as a debt to the people. Nor does their shaven crown in 
the least remind them that a priest ought to be free from 
[ 101 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
all worldly desires and ought to set his mind upon nothing 
but heavenly things. These amiable men, on the contrary, 
say that they have well cleared themselves of their obliga-
tions if they somehow mutter those little prayers which, 
so help me, make me wonder whether any God hears or 
understands them, since the priests themselves barely 
hear them and do not understand them, even while they 
echo them with their mouths. But the priests have this 
much in common with the profane, that all alike watch 
for the harvest of profits, nor is a single one of them ig-
norant of the laws on this subject. Also, if there is any 
load to be borne, they cast it prudently on the shoulders 
of someone else, and thus one will shift it to another as 
men bandy a ball from hand to hand. As lay princes also 
entrust to ministers some parts of the ruling of their realm, 
and a minister turns over his share to some other minister, 
just so do priests, by reason of modesty, leave all pursuit 
of piety to the common folk; the folk cast it back on those 
whom they call "ecclesiastics," as if they themselves had 
no traffic whatever with the church and their baptismal 
vows had not the slightest effect. The priests, in turn, that 
call themselves "secular," as if admitted to the world, not 
to Christ, roll this burden off upon the regulars; the reg-
ulars put it upon the monks; the monks that have more 
liberty upon those that are stricter, and both together 
upon the mendicants; the mendicants upon the Car-
thusians, among whom, and nowhere else, piety lies 
hidden-and so lies that it is hardly permissible to find it 
out. Likewise the popes, so very diligent in reaping the 
pecuniary harvest, relegate their surplus of apostolic 
labors to the bishops; the bishops relegate them to the 
pastors, the pastors to the vicars, the vicars to the men-
[ 102 J 

FORTUNE FAVORS FOOLS 
dicant friars. These, however, push the care of the sheep 
back upon those who take the wool. 
[34] But it is no part of my plan to canvass the lives of 
pontiffs and priests, for fear I should seem to compose a 
satire rather than pronounce a eulogy. And let no one 
think that good princes are taxed when I praise bad ones. 
But I have touched on these topics briefly in order to 
make clear to everyone that no mortal man can live hap-
pily unless he has been admitted to my mysteries and 
possesses my favor. For how else could it be, when For-
tune herself, the directrix of human affairs, is so thor-
oughly of a mind with me that she always has been most 
hostile to the wise? But she brings all her gifts to fools, 
even while they are asleep. Have you not heard of one 
Timotheus who had a nickname and a proverb about 
him, "Fish came to his net when he was asleep." Again, 
there is the saying, "The owl flies." On the other hand, 
there are the proverbs that fit the wise: "He was born in 
the fourth month," and "He has the horse of Seius," and 
"gold of Toulouse." But I give up proverbializing, for 
fear I shall seem to have rifled the compilations of my 
good friend Erasmus. 
To my subject, then. Fortune loves those who are less 
than discreet, she loves the rasher sort, and the ones who 
are fond of that saying, "The die is cast." But wisdom 
makes men meticulous, which is why you commonly see 
that the traffic of wise men is with poverty, hunger, and 
smoke; you see them living neglected, inglorious, and dis-
liked. You see my fools abounding in money, holding the 
helms of states, in brief, flourishing every way. For if we 
esteem it a blessing to please princes and to mingle with 
such favorites of mine, these gods decked with gems, what 
c 108 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
is less to the purpose than wisdom? In the eyes of that rank 
of men, what, indeed, is more damning? If wealth is to be 
gathered, how much money would a merchant make if, 
running after wisdom, he should boggle at perjury, 
should blush to be taken in a lie, should in the least suffer 
from those inconvenient scruples of the wise touching 
theft and the taking of usury? Then if anyone sets his 
heart upon ecclesiastical honors and wealth, an ass or a 
buffalo will attain to them sooner than a wise man. If 
you are inclined to a certain sort of pleasure, the girls, a 
very important part of the human comedy, have given 
their hearts away to fools; they startle at a wise man and 
run from him, as from a scorpion. Lastly, whoever makes 
preparations to live a little more gaily and jovially will 
first of all shut the wise man out, and will prefer to let in 
any other animal. Wherever you circulate, in short, 
among popes, princes, judges, m<;lgistrates, friends, 
enemies, the great, or the humble, everything is done by 
cash in hand; and as the wise have contempt for cash, it 
carefully maintains the custom of avoiding them. 
[35] Although there is no bound to my praises, or end 
of them, yet it is necessary that my oration shall have an 
end-sometime. And so I shall leave off speaking-but if 
first I shall show briefly that there have been great au-
thors who have illustrated me by their writings, and as 
much by their goings-on, then perchance I shall not seem 
to have foolishly pleased only myself; and the lawyers 
cannot slander me by saying that "nothing is alleged." 
Hence, following their example, I allege my proofs, to 
wit, nothing to the point. 
In the first place, all men agree with that familiar 
maxim, "If you don't have a thing, simulate it." And 
c 104 J 

SUPPORT FROM THE CLASSICS 
right along that line is the verse we teach to children, 
"To pretend to be a fool is sometimes the highest wis-
dom." You can figure for yourselves the great value of 
folly when the mere imitation of it, or pretense to it, is so 
highly esteemed by learned men. But much more frankly 
does that fat and sleek hog from the sty of Epicurus bid 
us "to mix in folly with our counsels"; although he rather 
discourteously puts in bre11em ("a little folly"). Elsewhere 
he says, "It is sweet to play the fool in season." And in 
another passage he had rather "be giddy and taken for a 
dolt, than be wise and fret." Now Telemachus, in Homer, 
though the poet praises him every way he can, is now and 
then called "silly"; and the tragic dramatists usually 
speak of boys and youths with this same epithet, as if it 
were a lucky one. What does that revered poem, the Iliad, 
contain, if not the quarrels of foolish kings and peoples? 
Then too, how absolute is that commendation of Cic-
ero's, "Everything is full of fools." Who has not learned 
that in proportion as a good is more widespread it is 
greater? 
Perhaps among Christians the authority of these writers 
is weak. We shall also prop up our commendations, if you 
please, with the testimony of the Holy Scriptures, if only 
at the beginning, as learned writers customarily do, we 
display a permit from the theologians for what we are 
about to utter, so that they will wish us godspeed. Then, 
since we undertake a difficult task, and probably it would 
be unfair to call upon the Muses again for such a long 
journey from Helicon to here-especially since the bus-
iness is out of their line-I think it more suitable while I 
play the divine and tread among thorns to beg that the 
soul of Scotus, itself more prickly than a porcupine or 
c 105 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
hedgehog, shall come from his beloved Sorbonne and 
dwell in my breast for a season; and very soon it shall go 
back whither it pleases, or to the dogs. Would that it were 
possible to put on another face and come rigged out as a 
divine, also! Indeed, as it is, I fear it: someone will lay 
against me the charge of theft, as if I had secretly plun-
dered the portfolios of Our Masters, because I have so 
much theological property in my possession. Yet really 
it should not seem strange that I have picked up a little, 
since for a long time I have been in closest contact with 
the divines. You recall that the pinchbeck god Priapus 
learned and retained some Greek words, merely by hear-
ing his master read. The cock in Lucian, by long associa-
tion with men, became skilled in human speech. 
Now to the business, under favorable auguries. Ec-
clesiastes has written in his first chapter: "The number 
of fools is infinite." When he terms the number infinite, 
does he not seem to embrace mortals generally, unless for 
a few-and I do not know that anyone has ever had the 
luck to see them. But Jeremiah testifies more ingenuously 
in his tenth chapter, saying, "Every man is made foolish 
by his own wisdom." He attributes wisdom to God alone, 
leaving folly as the portion of all men. And again, a little 
earlier: "Let not man glory in his wisdom." Why do you 
not wish man to glory in his wisdom, excellent Jeremiah? 
For the simple reason, he would of course answer, that he 
has no wisdom. But I return to Ecclesiastes. Thus when 
he writes, "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity," what else do 
you think he means but that, just as I have told you, 
human life is nothing but a sport of folly? And indeed he 
adds an affirmative vote to the sentiment of Cicero, over 
whose great name is set down, as I mentioned just now, 
[ 106 J 

SOLOMON ON FOOLS 
"Everything is full of fools." Again, when the wise Ec-
clesiasticus said that "the fool is changed as the moon," 
but that "the wise man is as fixed as the sun," what did 
he intend to show except that the whole human race is 
foolish, and the attribute of wisdom is meet for God alone? 
For interpreters always read "moon" as human nature, 
and "sun," the source of all light, as God. In agreement 
with this we find Christ in the Gospels forbids that any-
one should be called good but one, and that is God. If a 
man who is not wise, then, is a fool, and whoever is good 
is ipso facto wise, in accordance with Stoic writers, it is a 
necessary conclusion that folly comprehends all men. 
Again Solomon, Chapter 15: "A fool," he says, "delights 
in his folly," that is, he clearly acknowledges that without 
folly nothing in life is sweet. That other text tends to the 
same effect: "He that increaseth knowledge increaseth 
sorrow, and in much wisdom is much grief." And does 
not the famous Preacher openly confess the same in Chap-
ter 7: "The heart of the wise is where sadness is, but the 
heart of fools follows mirth." By this you see that he held 
it not enough to have learned wisdom if you have not 
also added a knowledge of me. But if you put little faith 
in me, take the words he wrote in Chapter 1: "I gave my 
heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly." 
In this passage it is to be noted that the advantage rests 
with folly, since he put it in the last place. Ecclesiastes 
wrote that, and you know the ecclesiastical order is for 
him that is first in dignity to get the last place, observing 
in this, at least, the precept of the Gospels. 
But that folly is more excellent than wisdom, Eccles-
iasticus, whoever he was, makes as clear as crystal in 
Chapter 44-whose words, so help me, I shall not quote 
c 107 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
until you accord my opening a suitable response, just the 
way, in Plato, the fellows do who dispute with Socrates. 
Now, is it more suitable to hide carefully away things 
that are rare and precious, or things that are vulgar and 
cheap? ... Why don't you say something? ... Well, 
even if you are dissembling, the Greek proverb will 
answer for you: "Buckets are left in doorways." (If any 
impious fellow is inclined to sniff at this saying, let him 
know that Aristode, the god of Our Masters, reports it.) 
But which of you is such a fool as to leave gems and gold 
lying in the street? ... I think none, so help me. You 
put them in the most hidden recesses; and that is not 
enough, in the most secret corners of your best guarded 
chests. But you throw dirt outdoors. Ergo, if what is more 
precious is hidden up, and what is more base is put out in 
the open, is it not clear that wisdom, which Ecclesiasticus 
forbids us to hide, is worth less than folly, which he bids 
us conceal? Now you can have his own words: "Better is 
the man that hideth his folly than he that hideth his wis-
dom." Or what about the passage wherein Holy Writ 
attributes honesty of soul to the fool, while the wise man 
all the while thinks there is no one like himself? For so I 
understand what Ecclesiastes wrote in Chapter 10: "A 
fool walking by the way, being a fool, esteems all men as 
fools." And is not that a remarkable kind of honesty, to 
hold all equal with oneself, and in a world where every-
body thinks of himself in a complimentary way, to share 
one's praises with all? For that cause the great King 
Solomon was not ashamed of the name, when he said in 
Chapter 30, "I am the most foolish of men.'' 
Paul, the great teacher of the Gentiles, writing to the 
Corinthians, freely owned to the name: "I speak as a 
c 108 J 

WHAT PAUL MEANT 
fool," he said; "I am more." This is as if it were a dis-
graceful thing to be outdone in folly. But now some Greek-
lings, grackle-like, will break in upon .tne with their 
clamor; they are zealous to peck at modern theologians, 
quite as if they were pecking out the eyes of crows; while 
they spread their own annotations like smoke over the 
commentary of others. In the register of this band my 
Erasmus (whom I often mention honoris causa) is listed as 
alpha, or if not, then at least as beta. "0 foolish citation," 
these Greeklings will say, "one worthy of Folly herself! 
The sense of the apostle is far different from what you 
dream it to be. For he did not intend by these words to 
have them believe him a greater fool than the rest. But 
when he had said, 'Are they ministers of Christ? So am 1,' 
and had equalled himself to others in this respect, some-
what led into boasting he added as an emphatic correc-
tion, 'I am more/ meaning that he was not only equal to 
the other apostles in the ministry of the gospel, but was 
superior to them. And though he wished this to be re-
ceived as true, yet for fear such an arrogant phrase would 
offend their ears, he guarded himself by the suggestion of 
folly-' I speak as a fool'-as if he would say that it is the 
privilege of fools that they alone may speak the truth 
without offense." 
But whatever Paul thought when he wrote these words, 
I leave to them to dispute about. I follow the great, fat, 
dull, and generally approved theologians, with whom the 
large majority of learned men choose to err, by Jove, 
rather than to understand aright with these trilinguists. 
No one among the majority accounts these Greeklings as 
anything more than grackles, especially when a certain 
renowned divine, whose name I suppress out of prudence 
r: 109 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
(for fear our grackles would constantly throw up at him 
that Greek gibe about the ass and the Lyra), by way of 
expounding in magisterial and theological fashion this 
passage, from the words, "I speak as a fool; I am more," 
began a new chapter in his book, and even--something 
that could not be done without the keenest logic-began 
a new section. He interpreted it in this fashion-for I shall 
give you his very words, in form as well as in substance: 
" 'I speak as a fool.' That is, if I seem to you a little 
foolish in making myself equal to those false apostles, I 
must seem more foolish in making myself superior to 
them." This same author, however, as if forgetting him-
self, a little later slips off into another interpretation. 
[36] But why should I solicitously defend myself with 
the example of one man, when it is the lawful prerogative 
of divines to stretch heaven, that is, the Holy Scriptures, 
as they would stretch a piece of sheepskin? If we may 
place any credit inJerome, master of five languages, even 
in Paul some words of Holy Scripture are in conflict, 
though in their context they seem not to conflict at all. 
Thus when, speaking to the Athenians, he went about to 
twist the inscription he had seen on an altar into an argu-
ment for the Christian faith, he omitted most ofthe words 
because they were against his purpose and picked out 
only four from the end, "to the Unknown God/' These he 
altered, since the whole inscription read, "To the Gods of 
Asia, Europe, and Mrica, to the Unknown Gods, and 
Foreign Gods." It must be by his example that our "sons 
of theologues" in these days will ordinarily accommodate 
to their own purpose four or five little words plucked out 
from here and there, even depraving the sense of them, if 
need be; although the words which precede and follow 
c 110 J 

A BIT OF EXEGESIS 
these are nothing at all to the point or even go against it. 
Theologians do this with such felicitous effrontery that 
our lawyers oftentimes become jealous of them. 
For to what length may they not go now, after this 
great divine-I almost let slip his name, but again I am 
afraid of the Greek proverb-has squeezed out of some 
words of Luke's a meaning precisely as congruent with 
the spirit of Christ as fire is with water. It is when the 
extreme trial was drawing near, a time when retainers 
and dependents usually make a special point of being 
with their patron, to organize for battle with what re-
sources they may have at hand. Christ, acting to the end 
that He might remove from the minds of His followers all 
hope for a defence of that kind, questioned them as to 
whether anything needful had been lacking when He 
sent them forth quite unequipped for travelling, since He 
neither furnished shoes to protect their feet against thorns 
and stones nor gave them a wallet to provide against 
hunger. When they denied that anything was lacking, He 
went on: "But now, he that hath a bag, let him take it, 
and likewise a wallet; and he that hath not a sword, let 
him sell his coat and buy one." Since the entire teaching 
of Christ enforces nothing but meekness, patience, con-
tempt of life, who does not clearly perceive the meaning 
of this passage? I take it that He purposed to disarm His 
ministers still more, so that not only neglecting shoes and 
wallet but throwing away their coat as well, they might, 
stripped and wholly disengaged, proceed to the work of 
the Gospel. They were to provide themselves with noth-
ing but a sword-not the sword with which bandits and 
murderers attack, but the sword of the spirit, which pen-
etrates into the secret places of the breast and at one 
c 111 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
stroke cuts off all earthly affections, so that the heart has 
place for no other passion than piety. 
But observe, I pray, how this celebrated theologian 
wrested these words. He interpreted "sword" as "defense 
against persecution," and "bag" as "sufficient provision 
of supplies"; as if Christ, with His mind so changed that it 
now seemed He had sent out His exhorters less royally 
equipped than they should be, made a recantation of His 
former doctrine; or as if forgetting He had said they 
would be blessed when they were assailed by reproaches, 
by evil speaking, by punishments, and had forbidden 
them to resist evil because the meek are blessed; as if for-
getting also that He had urged upon them the example of 
the sparrows and of lilies, and now was so unwilling they 
should go without a sword that he bade them buy one 
even by selling their coat, preferring that they should go 
naked rather than not girt round with a good blade. On 
top of this our theologue, you recall, intends that by the 
word "sword" is embraced whatever is necessary for re-
pelling violence, and by the word "bag" is embraced 
whatever is necessary to support life. And so this inter-
preter of the divine mind leads forth the apostles equipped 
with lances, crossbows, slings, and muskets, for the task 
of preaching Christ crucified. He loads them with port-
manteaus also, with hand-bags, and knapsacks-for fear 
it would be the rule, perchance, that they must always 
leave their inn without eating. Nor has it disturbed this 
interpreter that He who thus earnestly bade that a sword 
be purchased, soon after with a rebuke ordered the same 
weapon to be sheathed; or that no one has ever heard it 
told that the apostles used swords or shields against the 
[ 112 J 

LEARNED COMMENTATORS 
violence of the heathen, though they would have used 
them if Christ had meant what the interpreter finds here. 
It was another, whose name I omit out of respect, and 
not at all because it is a bad name, who made out of the 
tents which Habakkuk :inentions-"the skins of the land 
of the Midians will be shaken"-the skin of St. Bar-
tholomew, who was flayed. I myself lately. attended a 
theological discussion (as I frequently do); when someone 
asked what injunction there is in Holy Scripture bidding 
that heretics shall be wiped out by fire rather than con-
futed by argument, a certain severe old fellow whose 
haughtiness proclaimed the theologian replied with a 
good deal of animosity that the Apostle Paul laid down 
this rule when he said, "A man that is an heretic, after 
the first and second admonition reject," the word for 
"reject" being devita. And when he had thundered out 
these words again and again, and most of his hearers were 
wondering what had struck the man, he at length ex-
plained that the heretic was to be removed de vita, from 
life! Some burst out laughing, and yet there were others 
to whom this discovery seemed absolutely theological. 
Against the few who still raised voices in opposition the 
Tenedian lawyer (as the phrase is) and irrefragable com-
mentator pursued the argument. "Take this point," he 
said. "It is written, 'Thou shalt not suffer a witch 
[mal¢cum] to live.' Every heretic is a witch [maleficus= 
bad, villainous]. Ergo," etc. Those present admired his 
powers of mind and went along with him, flat-footedly, in 
his reasoning. It did not come into anyone's head that 
this injunction applied only to sorcerers, enchanters, and 
magicians, whom the Hebrews in their tongue call 
Mekaschephim, which we translate as mal¢ci or "witches." 
[ 118] 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
For otherwise-using maleficus as above-it would be in-
cumbent upon us to punish fornication and drunkenness 
by death. 
But I am foolish to pursue these points, which are so 
numberless that all of them could not be contained in the 
books of Chrysippus or Didymus. At least I wish you to 
keep this in mind, that since things like that are permitted 
to theological masters, it is but fair to allow the same in-
dulgence also to me (who am obviously but a pinchbeck 
divine), if I shall not make every quotation and citation 
with absolute exactness. Now at last I get back to Paul. 
"Suffer fools gladly," he says, speaking of himself; and 
again, "Receive me as a fool"; also, "I do not speak ac-
cording to God, but as if in foolishness." Again, he says 
in another place, "We are fools for Christ's sake." From 
so great a writer you hear such great commendations of 
folly! What he does, in fact, is publicly to teach and en-
join this folly as a thing specially necessary and good for 
the town: "Let him that seems to be wise among you be-
come a fool, that he may be wise!" And in Luke, the two 
disciples with whom Jesus joined company on the high-
way He called "fools." Nor do I know any reason why it 
should seem strange that Paul attributed a measure of 
folly even to God: "The foolishness of God," he said, "is 
wiser than men." To be sure, Origen in his interpreta-
tion objects that this foolishness can hardly be equivalent 
to the ordinary fancies of men; which last are indicated 
in that other passage: "The preaching of the Cross is to 
them that perish foolishness." 
[37] Yet why am I so needlessly careful in going about 
to support these matters by all these proofs and witnesses 
when in the mystical psalms Christ himself, speaking to 
[ 114 J 

FOOLS PLEASING TO GOD 
the Father, says for all men to hear, "Thou knowest my 
foolishness"? Nor indeed is it without cause that fools are 
so vastly pleasing to God; the reason being, I suggest, 
that just as great princes look suspiciously on men who 
are too clever, and hate them-as Julius Caesar suspected 
and hated Brutus and Cassius while he did not fear 
drunken Antony at all, Nero was suspicious of Seneca, 
Dionysius of Plato-while on the other hand they take 
delight in duller and simpler souls; so Christ detests 
and condemns those wise men who rely on their own 
prudence. Paul witnesses to this very clearly when he 
says, "God has chosen the foolish things of the world," 
and when he says, "It has pleased God to save the world 
by foolishness," seeing that it could never be redeemed 
by wisdom. But God points this out clearly enough, when 
He cries through the mouth of the prophet, "I will de-
stroy the wisdom of the wise, and I will reject the prudence 
of the prudent." And again, our Lord gave thanks that 
God had concealed the mystery of salvation from the 
wise, but had revealed it to babes, that is, to fools. For 
the Greek word for "babes" is VTJ1TLO~~. generally used a's 
the opposite to a-o~ols, "the wise." It tends to the same 
effect when in the Gospels He often attacks the scribes 
and Pharisees and doctors of the law, whereas He faith-
fully defends the ignorant multitude. For what is "Woe 
unto you, scribes and Pharisees" except "Woe unto you 
that are wise?" But He seems to find most potent delight 
in little children, women, and fishermen. And even in the 
class of brute creatures, those which are farthest from a 
foxlike cunning were best pleasing to Christ. He preferred 
to ride upon a donkey, though had He chosen He could 
have mounted the back of a lion without danger. And the 
[ 115 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
Holy Spirit descended in likeness of a dove, not of an eagle 
or a kite. Here and there in Holy Writ, furthermore, 
there is repeated mention of harts, fawns, and lambs. 
Add to this that Christ calls those who are destined to 
eternal life by the name "sheep"-and there is no other 
creature more foolish, as is witnessed by the prqverbial 
phrase in Aristotle, "sheepish temperament," which he 
tells us was suggested by the stupidity of the animal and 
commonly used as a taunt against dull-witted and foolish 
men. And yet Christ avows himself as shepherd of this 
flock and even delights in the name of Lamb, as when 
John pointed Him out, "Behold the Lamb of God!" 
There is much use of this term also in the book of Revela-
tions. 
What do all these things cry out to us if not this, that 
mortal men, even the pious, are fools? And that Christ, in 
order to relieve the folly of mankind, though Himself"the 
wisdom of the Father," was willing in some manner to be 
made a fool when He took upon Himself the nature of a 
man and was found in fashion as a man? And likewise He 
was made "to be sin" that He might heal sinners. Nor did 
He wish to bring healing by any other means than by 
"the foolishness of the cross," and by weak and stupid 
apostles upon whom He carefully enjoined folly, dissuad-
ing them from wisdom, while He incited them by the 
example of children, lilies, mustard-seed, and sparrows-
witless things and deficient in sense, living their lives by 
the guidance of nature with no art or anxious care. Be-
yond this, He forbade them to be troubled about what 
they should say before magistrates and He charged that 
they should not inquire into times and seasons; in a word, 
they should not trust to their own wisdom but wholly 
[ 116 J 

FOOLS ARE FORGIVEN 
depend upon Him. To the same effect we learn that God, 
architect of the world, charged upon pain of death that 
men should not eat of the tree of knowledge, exactly as if 
knowledge is the bane of happiness. Likewise Paul spe-
cifically disavows knowledge as that which puffs up and 
works harm. St. Bernard is following him, I suppose, 
when he interprets that mountain whereon Lucifer es-
tablished his headquarters as "the Mount of Knowledge." 
It would seem, surely, that we ought not overlook this 
argument, that folly is so acceptable to the heavenly 
powers that forgiveness of its errors is assured, whereas 
nothing is forgiven to wisdom; whence it comes about that 
when the prudent pray for pardoning grace, though they 
were prudent enough when they sinned, they use the ex-
cuse and defense of having acted foolishly. For thus 
Aaron in the book of Numbers, if I recall aright, begged 
that the punishment of his sister might be remitted: "I 
beseech, my master, that you lay not this sin, which we 
have committed foolishly, to our charge." Thus also Saul 
asked from David pardon for his fault, saying, "For it is 
apparent that I have done foolishly." David himself, in 
turn, speaks fair to God: "But I pray, 0 Lord, that Thou 
mayst take away the iniquity of Thy servant, because I 
have done foolishly," as if he could not obtain grace by 
his request unless he pleaded folly and ignorance. But the 
point is proved still more cogently by the fact that Christ, 
when He prayed on the Cross for His enemies, "Father, 
forgive them," pleaded no other mitigation than ig-
norance, saying, "for they know not what they do." In 
like manner Paul wrote to Timothy: "But therefore I 
have obtained the mercy of God, because being ignorant 
I acted in unbelief." What is the meaning of "being 
c 117 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
ignorant I acted" except "I acted foolishly, not ma-
liciously"? What is "But therefore I obtained the mercy 
of God" except "I should not have obtained it except as 
I was made more pardonable by the excuse of folly"? 
The mystical psalmist-though I forgot to use the quota-
tion in its proper place-supports me: "Remember not 
the sins of my youth and my ignorances." You have 
heard him making two excuses-youth, with which I am 
always a present companion, and ignorance; and this 
last in the plural number, so that we are to understand a 
great flood of folly. 
[38] But I should not further pursue that which is in-
finite; let me speak compendiously. The Christian re-
ligion on the whole seems to have a kinship with some 
sort of folly, while it has no alliance whatever with wis-
dom. If you want proofs of this statement, observe first of 
all how children, old people, women, and fools find 
pleasure beyond other folk in holy and religious things, 
and to that end are ever nearest the altars, led no doubt 
solely by an impulse of nature. Then you will notice that 
the original founders of religion, admirably laying hold of 
pure simplicity, were the bitterest foes of literary learning. 
Lastly, no fools seem to act more foolishly than do the 
people whom zeal for Christian piety has got possession 
of; for they pour out their wealth, they overlook wrongs, 
allow themselves to be cheated, make no distinction be-
tween friends and enemies, shun pleasure, glut them-
selves with hunger, wakefulness, tears, toils, and re-
proaches; they disdain life and dearly prefer death; in 
short, they seem to have grown utterly numb to ordinary 
sensations, quite as if their souls lived elsewhere and not 
in their bodies. What is this, forsooth, but to be mad? 
c 118 J 

CHRISTIAN FOLLY 
Whereby we should find it less strange that the apostles 
appeared to be drunk with new wine, and that Paul, in 
the eyes of his judge, Festus, looked as if he had gone mad. 
Come, now that I have "put on the lion's skin," I shall 
show this also, that the happiness of Christians, which 
they pursue with so much travail, is nothing else but a 
kind of madness and folly. Let these words give no offense; 
instead, keep your mind on the point. To begin with, 
Christians come near to agreeing with Platonists in this, 
that the soul is sunk and shackled by corporeal bonds, 
being so clogged by the grossness of the body that but 
little can it contemplate and enjoy things as they truly 
are. Hence Plato defined philosophy as "a study of 
death," because it leads the mind away from visible and 
bodily things, and certainly death does the same. And 
thus as long as the soul uses the bodily organs aright, so 
long it is called sane, but when with its bonds broken it 
attempts to make good its liberty, planning, as it were, 
escape from its prison, then it is called mad. If perchance 
this condition arises from sickness or a defect of some 
organ, then by common consent it is unmistakable in-
sanity. Yet we see men of this sort predict future events, 
we see them understand languages and discourse which 
they have not previously known, and in general manifest 
something partaking of the divine. No doubt this hap-
pens because as the soul is a little more free from the taint 
of the body, it begins to exert its own native powers. I 
conceive the same to be the cause that something very 
similar is wont to happen with those who are near death 
in their sufferings. As if inspired, they speak things far 
above a common strain. Yet if such a thing results from 
zeal for religion, perhaps it is not the same sort of madness 
c 119 J 

THF. PRAISE OF FOLLY 
but so near to it that the greater part of mankind will 
judge it to be mere insanity, especially in view of the fact 
that only a handful of unimportant people out of the 
whole society of mortals thus differ completely from the 
rest in their way of life. 
And so it ordinarily fares with men as it fared in Plato's 
myth, I gather, between those who admired shadows, still 
bound in the cave, and that one who broke away and, 
returning to the doorway, proclaimed that he had seen 
realities and that they who believed nothing existed ex-
cept shadows were greatly deceived. Just as this wise man 
pitied and deplored the madness of those who were 
gripped by such an error, they, on their side, derided him 
as if he were raving, and cast him out. In like fashion the 
great masses of people admire what things are most 
corporeal and deem that such come near to being the 
only things they are. The religious, on the contrary, pay 
less attention to anything the more nearly it concerns the 
body, and they are wholly rapt away in the contempla-
tion of things unseen. For the majority assign the leading 
rdle to riches and the next to bodily comforts, while they 
leave the lowliest for the soul, which most of them, how-
ever, believe does not exist, because it is not seen by the 
eye. In quite different fashion the religious with one 
accord direct their first endeavors toward God himself, 
the purest of all existences; next Him, toward that which 
yet comes as close as possible to Him, namely, the soul. 
They neglect the care of the body. They altogether dis-
dain riches as mere nutshells, and turn their backs upon 
them. Or if they are forced to handle matters of the kind, 
they do so grudgingly and uneasily, having as if they did 
not have, possessing as if they did not possess. 
c 120 J 

THE PIOUS VS. THE WORLD 
On particular points there are great degrees of differ-
ence between these two sorts of persons. In the first place, 
although all the senses have alliance with the body, cer-
tain of them are grosser, such as touch, hearing, sight, 
smell, taste, while certain ones are less closely tied up 
with the body, as the memory, intellect, and will. To 
whichever one the soul applies itself, that one grows 
strong. Forasmuch as every energy of the devout soul 
strives toward objects which are at farthest remove from 
the grosser senses, these grow numb, as it were, and 
stupefy; whence it comes that we hear about saints who 
have chanced to drink oil in place of wine. Among the 
passions and impulses of the mind, again, some have more 
connection with the physical body, as lust, love of food 
and sleep, anger, pride, envy. With these the pious are 
irreconcilably at war, while the multitude, on the other 
hand, consider that without them life does not exist. Then 
there are some feelings of a middle sort, merely natural, 
so to speak, such as love of one's father, affection for one's 
children, relatives, and friends; to these feelings the mul-
titude pays considerable respect, but the pious endeavor 
to pluck them, too, out of their minds, except so far as, 
rising to the highest spiritual plane, they love a parent 
not as parent-for what did he beget but the body, and 
even that is owed to God as Father-but rather as a good 
man, one in whom is manifest the impress of that Su-
preme Mind which they call the summum bonum and be-
yond which, they assert, nothing is to be loved or sought 
for. 
By the same rule they also measure all others of life's 
duties, and in general they either scorn that which is 
visible or make much less of it than of things invisible. 
[ 121 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
They say also that both body and spirit enter into the 
sacraments and into the very offices of piety; as in fasting, 
they do not account it of much worth if a person abstains 
from meats or from a meal, that which the vulgar esteem 
an absolute fast, unless at the same time he in some 
measure frees himself from passions, yielding less than he 
is wont to anger, less to pride; and then the spirit, 
weighed down less by the burden of the body, may climb 
upwards even to the partaking and enjoying of celestial 
bounties. In like manner, too, with the Eucharist, al-
though it is not to be slighted, they say, merely because 
it is administered with ceremonies, yet of itself it is either 
of little profit or indeed harmful except so far as that 
which is spiritual is added to it-in a word, that which is 
represented under the visible symbols. For the death of 
Christ is so represented, and this it behooves mortal men 
to translate into the taming, extinguishing, and, as it 
were, burying of their carnal affections; that they may 
arise to a newness of life and be made one with Him, and 
one also with each other. Thus a devout man does, and 
such is his contemplation. The crowd, on the other hand, 
believes that the sacrament is no more than coming to the 
altar, as close as may be, hearing the noise of words, and 
watching the whole pageant of ceremonial details. Nor in 
this alone, which I set forth merely as an example, but in 
all of his life the pious man sincerely forsakes whatever 
has alliance with the body and is drawn to eternal, in-
visible, and spiritual objects. 
[39] Wherefore, since there is so great contrariety be-
tween the pious and the vulgar, it comes about that each 
appears to the other to be mad-though in my opinion, 
to be sure, the word is more correctly applied to the pious 
[ 122 J 

THE SUMMUM BONUM 
than to the others. This will become clearer if I briefly 
demonstrate, as I promised to do, that their summum 
bonum itself is no other than a kind of insanity. First, let us 
suppose that Plato was dreaming of something very like 
it when he wrote that "the madness of lovers is the hap-
piest state of all." Now he who loves intensely no longer 
lives in himself but in whatever he loves, and the more he 
can depart from himself and enter into the other, the 
happier he is. And when a mind yearns toward travelling 
out of the body, and does not rightly use its own bodily 
organs, you doubtless, and with accuracy, call the state 
of it madness. Otherwise, what do they mean by those 
common phrases, "he is not at home," and "to come to 
yourself," and "he is himself again"? Furthermore, so far 
as the love is more perfect the madness is greater and 
more delightful. Of what sort, then, is that future life 
with those who dwell on high, toward which pious hearts 
aspire with such fervor? First the spirit, as conqueror and 
the more vital, will overmaster and absorb the body, and 
this it will do the more easily in that now it is in its own 
realm, so to speak, and also because already, during life, 
it has cleansed and lightened the body in preparation for 
this change. Then the spirit itself will be absorbed in mar-
vellous wise by that supreme spirit, more potent than its 
infinity of parts. Thus the whole man will be outside ot 
himself, nor will he be happy for any other reason than 
that, so placed outside of himself, he shall have some in-
effable portion in that summum bonum which draws all 
things unto itself. And although this happiness arrives at 
its perfection only when souls, joined to their former 
bodies, shall be clothed with immortality, yet because 
the earthly life of pious folk is nothing but a contempla-
C 12s J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
tion and kind of shadowing of that other, they sometimes 
feel a foretaste and a glow of the reward to come. Al-
though this is :;ts but the least little drop in comparison 
with that flowing fountain of eternal happiness, yet it far 
surpasses any bodily pleasure, yes, even if all mortal de-
lights were brought together into one. By so much does 
the spiritual excel over the corporeal, and the invisible 
over the visible. This surely is what the prophet has 
promised: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither 
have entered into the heart of man the things which God 
hath prepared for them that love Him." And this truly is 
the portion of Folly, that "good part" which "shall not be 
taken away" by the transformation of life, but will be 
perfected. 
Hence those who are permitted to have a foretaste of 
this-and it comes to but few-suffer something very 
like to madness. They say things that are not quite co-
herent, and this not in the ordinary way of men, but they 
make a sound without meaning, and suddenly they 
change the whole aspect of their faces; now cheerful, now 
downcast, they will weep, then laugh, and then sigh; in 
brief, they are truly outside themselves. When presently 
they return to themselves they say that they do not know 
where they have been, whether in the body or out of it, 
waking or sleeping; they do not remember what they 
have heard, seen, spoken, or done; and yet through a 
cloud, or as in a dream, they know one thing, that they 
were at their happiest while they were thus out of their 
wits. So they are sorry to come to themselves again and 
would prefer, of all good things, nothing but to be mad 
always with this madness. And this is a tiny little taste of 
that future happiness. 
[ 124 J 

PERORATION 
[40] But indeed I have long since forgotten myself and 
run out of bounds. If anything I have said shall seem too 
saucy or too glib, stop and think: 'tis Folly, and a woman, 
that has spoken. But of course you will also remember 
that Greek proverb, "Even a foolish man will often speak 
a word in season," unless, perhaps, you assume that this 
does not extend to women. I see that you are expecting a 
peroration, but you are just too foolish if you suppose 
that after I have poured out a hodgepodge of words like 
this I can recall anything that I have said. There is an 
old saying, "I hate a pot-companion with a memory." 
Here is a new one: "I hate a hearer that remembers any-
thing." 
And so farewell .... Applaud ... live ... drink ..• 
0 most distinguished initiates of Folly! 


COMMENTARY 


Analysis 
R
FERENCE 
HAS BEEN 
MADE, IN THE INTRODUC-
tory essay, to the logical and rhetorical structure 
of The Praise of Folly. The outline or brief below 
will make clear this structure. The form used is 
the traditional one drawn from analysis of the 
classical oration. The main parts, in this form, are the 
Exordium (designed to win attention and conciliate the 
audience), the Narration (presenting reasons for speak-
ing or the factual basis of the question, or both), the Par-
tition (dividing the subject and indicating the main 
topics to be pursued), the Confirmation, or Argument 
(the main body of the speech), and the Peroration. Some-
times the Proposition, a statement and definition of the 
subject, was made a separate part, but often it was 
thought of as belonging with the Partition. The classical 
form also allowed for one or more digressions, usually in 
the Confirmation. It will be observed that in Section 31 
of the eulogy, when Folly ridicules the preaching of the 
friars, she goes over this same form of outline as it appears 
in their sermons. 
The brief shows logical relations and order of ideas. It 
does not show the great variety of methods used by 
Erasmus to introduce and to develop these ideas. His 
transitions are worth special attention. Page-references 
have been given for the main headings, so that a notion 
may be gained of the proportion of time spent upon each 
of the various topics. We find that Erasmus often develops 
r: 129 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
at great length what appears in the brief as a very minor 
point. One might say that he feels free to dwell upon 
whatever idea catches his fancy and stimulates his mind. 
Yet in well organized arguments, such as these are, a con-
tention placed in a most subordinate position is the ul-
timate support of all placed above it. Thus when Erasmus 
expends several pages upon what appears in the brief as 
point XI C 6 h (2), "They [the preaching friars] use far-
fetched exordia," he is abundantly proving point h, 
"Their preaching is absurd," which in turn supports 
point 6, "The follies of monks make them happy," and 
this is one part of the ground covered by the main point, 
XI, "All people are followers of Folly." Incidentally, this 
eleventh main point, as its inclusive nature warrants, 
gives rise to the longest treatment of any-about one-
fourth of the eulogy. Yet space is not the only criterion of 
importance. From the moment that Erasmus introduces 
his criticism of theologians (Section 28) to the beginning 
of the peroration there is a rising movement-a tighten-
ing of grasp and a deepening of essential seriousness. The 
movement is not unbroken. In order to maintain some 
consistency with the earlier part-and perhaps by way of 
"comic relier'-Erasmus gives the brief argument that 
"Fortune favors fools" (Section 34) and indulges in a 
certain amount of fooling in Section 35. But that the 
order of climax is well observed, and that the last argu-
ment (Sections 38-39), dealing with "Christian folly," is 
in the author's view the most important thing he has to 
say, one cannot well doubt. 
The unequal allotment of space, however, makes it 
impossible to divide the declamation into sections, for 
purposes of reference, exactly according to the headings 
c 180 J 

ANALYSIS 
of the outline. The translator has divided it into forty 
sections of fairly equal length, numbered by Arabic 
numerals in brackets, and the division will be found to 
accord with important units of thought. Section-numbers 
are placed in the margin of the outline so as to indicate 
the relation of each section to the progress of the logical 
argument. 
It is possible to discern, over and above the analysis as 
given, a three-fold division of the Confirmation, in which 
the headings would be: (I) Folly is truly a goddess (includ-
ing all the present headings 1-X); (II) All people worship 
her (heading XI); (III) She is approved by poets, prophets, 
and deities (headings XII-XIV). The first of these three 
divisions is the hardest to see as a unit; and it has been 
thought best not to attempt treating it (or the third one) 
as such in the present analysis. But that this tripartite 
scheme more or less definitely underlies the eulogy may 
well be argued. 
(PROPOSITION: FOLLY DESERVES THE PRAISE OF ALL.] 
Exordium (pp. 7-8) 
[1] 
I. Folly's mere appearance makes her welcome. 
II. Her garb is explained by her purpose. 
Narration (pp. 8-9) 
(2] 
I. It is proper that Folly should praise herself. 
A. She knows herself best. 
B. To do so is more modest than hiring a publicity 
agent. 
C. One should praise one's self if no one else will do 
it. 
D. Orators have praised much worse subjects. 
II. Her speech will be extempore. 
c 181 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
Partition (pp. 9-11) 
[3] 
I. She will not define or divide herself. 
II. She is as you see her. 
A. She can be recognized even in those who try to 
hide her. 
III. [Digression] She will imitate modern rhetoricians 
and sprinkle in a few Greek words. 
Confirmation (pp. 11-124) 
[4] 
I. Folly is great in her ancestry and birth. (pp. 11-12) 
A. She is the child of Plutus and Youth. 
B. Plutus, her father, is greatest of all gods. 
C. She was not born in wedlock. 
II. She is great in her birthplace and early care. (pp. 
12-13) 
A. She was born in the Fortunate Isles. 
B. She was nursed by Drunkenness and Ignorance. 
III. She has distinguished assistants. (p. 13) 
A. She is attended by Drunkenness, Ignorance, Self-
Love, Flattery, Forgetfulness, Laziness, Pleasure, 
Madness, Wantonness, Intemperance, and Sleep. 
[5] IV. She has rightful claims to divinity. (pp. 13-22) 
A. She is divine in the greatness of her power. 
1. She is responsible for our birth. 
[6] 
2. She gives pleasure, the true principle of life. 
a. The young and the old are happiest. 
b. Her making the old into children again is 
the pleasantest of metamorphoses. 
c. She keeps people young. 
[7J 
3. She has power over the other gods. 
[8J 
B. Human happiness depends upon folly. (pp. 22-
28) 
1. The attempt of reason to govern breaks 
down. 
2. Men get happiness from women, who are 
fools. 
c 182 J 

ANALYSIS 
3. Conviviality depends upon folly for its power 
to please. 
[9] 
4. Friendship needs folly as an aid. 
5. Marriage needs folly. 
[10] 
C. Folly's chief companion, Philautia, also brings 
happiness. (pp. 28-30) 
1. A man must be satisfied with himself to have 
pleasure or to be tolerable to others. 
2. Self-love makes possible all of one's accom-
plishments. 
3. Self-love prevents shame and discontent. 
[11] 
V. All great actions depend upon Folly and her com-
panions. (pp. 30-35) 
A. War depends upon folly. 
1. It is foolish in its whole conception. 
2. Military skill does not demand philosophic 
wisdom. 
B. Philosophers are unfitted for important affairs. 
1. This is shown by the examples of Socrates, 
Plato, and others. 
2. [Refutation] Plato's philosopher-king has not 
been effective. 
a. This is shown by the example of the 
Catos and others. 
b. Even good kings leave the realm to bad 
sons. 
c. [Digression] The wise are usually un-
fortunate in their children. 
C. Philosophers are out of place in everyday oc-
cupations. 
[12] 
D. Civil society has been drawn and held together 
by folly and flattery. 
E. The men who founded the arts were foolish. 
[13] VI. Folly gives true prudence. (pp. 35-38) 
A. Prudence in action requires rashness rather than 
consideration. 
( ISS J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
B. Even prudence in judgment is not what it is 
ordinarily thought to be. 
1. Things are not what they seem to be. 
a. Men but play parts in the world. 
2. A wise man from heaven who saw through 
the disguises would be imprudent. 
3. The really prudent man joins in acting the 
comedy, foolish as it may be. 
[14] VII. Even wisdom is arrived at by way of folly. (pp. 38-
43) 
A. The wise man pictured by the Stoics is a monster. 
1. He could not fit into a human world. 
[15] 
B. Without folly, wisdom would lead to suicide. 
1. The life of man, as seen by the gods, is 
wretched. 
2. Old age would be intolerable without folly. 
3. Shame and infamy are not felt by fools. 
[16] VIII. [Refutation] The argument that to be foolish is an 
unhappy state is untenable. (pp. 43-51) 
A. To be foolish is the natural state of man. 
B. It is not true that knowledge of the sciences in-
creases man's happiness. 
1. The sciences were devised for man's harm. 
2. People of the golden age were happy without 
them. 
3. Among the sciences the more foolish are the 
more acceptable to mankind. 
a. Medicine is most acceptable, law is next, 
and theology, natural science, etc. are 
properly inacceptable. 
C. Among animals, those farthest from discipline 
are happiest. 
1. The· bees are happy and admirable. 
2. The horse suffers from participation in 
human affairs. 
3. The cock in Lucian also proves this. 
D. Gryllus was happier than Odysseus, who forsook 
the guidance of nature. 
[ 184 J 

ANALYSIS 
[17] 
E. Natural fools are the happiest of men. 
1. They are free from fears and duties. 
2. They enjoy the affection of everyone. 
3. They enjoy the special favor of kings. 
4. They can speak the truth without offense. 
5. How happy they are may be seen by compar-
ing them with scholars. 
[18] IX. [Refutation] It is not true that madness is a form of 
wretchedness. (pp. 51-65) 
[19] 
[20] 
[21] 
A. This argument ignores the distinction among 
kinds of madness. 
1. There is a benevolent madness. 
a. Horace, Cicero, and others prove this. 
B. Many kinds of madness are harmlessly pleasur-
able. 
1. Such are the crazes for hunting, building, 
alchemy. 
2. Gamblers are either harmlessly mad or else 
under the spell of the Furies. 
3. People who hear and tell monstrous stories 
are harmlessly mad. 
4. People who believe that charms and prayers 
to saints will help them are mad. 
a. Reprobates who expect the payment of a 
small sum to wipe out their offenses must 
be mad. 
b. People pray to be assisted in, rather than 
delivered from, their follies. 
c. To tell them that a good life is more 
effectual would make them unhappy. 
5. People who arrange for their own funerals 
and those who glory in their ancestry are 
harmlessly mad. 
c. All people are pleased by self-love. 
1. Artists especially demonstrate this. 
2. Cities and races enjoy self-love. 
[ 185 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
D. Flattery also deludes men in a commendable 
way. 
1. Flattery is wrongly linked with deceit. 
a. The dog and squirrel flatter, yet are faith-
ful. 
2. True flattery proceeds from kindness. 
3. True flattery has only good effects. 
a. It makes people feel better. 
b. It produces eloquence, medicine, and 
poetry. 
[22] 
E. The really sad thing is not to be deceived. 
1. The mind is more taken with appearances 
than realities. 
a. Solid matter in a sermon displeases, while 
fables please. 
2. Illusion is a cheap and easily available 
pleasure. 
3. Not to be deceived is to be lonely. 
[23] 
X. Folly is greater than the other gods. (pp. 65-67) 
A. Her consolations are preferable to those of 
Bacchus. 
B. Other gods are fickle and partial in favor, while 
she is constant and impartial. 
C. Other gods require special worship and sac-
rifices. 
D. Though she has no temples of stone, all men are 
her living temples. 
E. She is worshipped more sincerely than are the 
Virgin and the saints. 
1. People worship only their images and do not 
exemplify their teachings and virtues. 
F. She is worshipped in all places. 
[24] XI. All people are followers of Folly. (pp. 67-103) 
A. The gods use the spectacle of mankind as an 
entertainment. 
B. Merchants are special devotees of the goddess. 
c 186 J 

ANALYSIS 
[25] 
C. Even people accounted wise are her devotees. 
1. Grammarians would be wretched except for 
their folly. 
a. Their pains are mitigated by their sense 
of power over schoolboys. 
b. They are happy in their affectation of 
scholarship. 
c. The composing of poetry pleases them. 
d. Their preoccupation with fine distinc-
tions pleasantly occupies their time. 
2. Poets are of Folly's faction. 
3. Rhetoricians belong to Folly's party. 
a. They reduce joking to an art. 
[26] 
4. Authors are kept happy by their follies. 
a. Authors with sound learning are un-
happy. 
b. Popularity is a function of folly. 
c. Plagiarists are happy for a time. 
d. Popular authors are immersed in folly. 
(1) They are conceited. 
(2) They use cryptic titles and pseu-
donyms. 
(3) They trade compliments. 
(4) They maintain rivalries just to keep 
before the public. 
[27] 
5. Men of the learned professions succeed 
through folly. 
a. Lawyers make a false show of erudition. 
b. Logicians and sophists may be put with 
the lawyers. 
c. Scientists deal in follies. 
(1) They claim to know what cannot be 
known. 
(2) They do not know the truth. 
(a) Each disagrees with the others. 
[28] 
d. Theologians depend upon folly for their 
happiness. 
(1) They are happy in their self-love. 
c 187 J 

(29] 
(30] 
[31] 
THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
(2) 
{3) 
(4) 
(5) 
They multiply useless distinctions 
and definitions. 
They play with abstruse questions. 
They lay down absurd ethical rules. 
They do not express realities as did 
the apostles. 
(6) They emend and criticize the 
church fathers. 
(7) They do not convert the heathen 
as did the apostles. 
(8) Men of sound divinity are disgusted 
by them. 
(9) They believe they uphold the 
church. 
(10) They make their own pictures of 
hell and heaven. 
(11) They use a language of their own. 
(12) They glory in the title of "Our 
Masters." 
6. The follies of monks make them happy. 
a. Although people dislike them, they are 
self -satisfied. 
b. They do not bother with learning. 
c. They can live by begging. 
d. They do everything by rule. 
e. Each order takes delight in its distinguish-
ing marks. 
f. They deceive themselves as to the efficacy 
of these things. 
(1) Christ will judge by a different 
standard. 
g. Nobody dares treat them with contempt. 
(1) They have power through the con-
fessional and through preaching. 
h. Their preaching is absurd. 
{1) They use an invocation, like the 
poets. 
[ 138 J 

ANALYSIS 
(2) They use far-fetched exordia. [Di-
gression concerning other preachers] 
(3) They neglect the narration. 
(4) They are pretentious in their 
argument. 
(5) They use a silly story in the perora-
tion. 
(6) They follow ignorantly and blindly 
rhetorical rules of delivery. 
i. Women and merchants are pleased by 
their preaching. 
[321 
7. Kings and courtiers worship folly. 
a. Folly makes a king's position tolerable. 
(1) A king conscious of his duties would 
be careworn and conscience-strick-
en. 
b. Courtiers give over all their days to foolish 
occupations and concerns. 
[33] 
8. Bishops, cardinals, and popes imitate kings 
and courtiers. 
a. A bishop who thought of the meaning of 
his garb and title would be condemned to 
irksome labor. 
b. A cardinal who took his duties seriously 
would be willing to give up his office. 
c. A pope who had a grain of wisdom would 
not be happy in his position. 
d. Popes, by lacking wisdom, lead a pleasant 
life. 
(1) They keep up the forms of religion 
only. 
(2) They maintain Peter's patrimony 
by the use of penalties. 
(3) They go to war as they please. 
9. Priests have a similar brand of folly. 
a. They also go to war-for tithes. 
b. They are satisfied with maintaining the 
forms of worship. 
[ 189 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
c. They pass on the performance of re-
ligious duties to others. 
[34) XII. Fortune favors fools. (pp. 103-104) 
A. This is shown by classic examples and proverbs. 
B. Wisdom is no aid in getting wealth. 
C. Fools are lucky in being more attractive to 
women than are wise men. 
D. Good fortune goes with money, which wise men 
shun. 
[35] XIII. Great authorities exalt folly. (pp. 104-118) 
A. Proverbs commend even an imitation of it. 
B. Horace, Homer, and Cicero make favorable 
allusions to it. 
C. Sacred writers commend it. 
1. Solomon, Jeremiah, Ecclesiasticus, and Paul 
give various commendations of it. 
[36] 
2. Interpreters vainly try to wrench their words 
to another meaning. 
a. [Digression] Biblical interpreters make 
great mistakes. 
(1) Nicholas Lyra is a case in point. 
(2) Other interpreters commit absurd-
ities. 
[37] 
D. Christ himself speaks of His foolishness. 
E. [Digression] Fools are acceptable to God. 
F. Christ favored the foolish of the world above the 
wise. 
1. His followers are called sheep. 
2. He is the Lamb of God. 
3. He became, in a manner, a fool in taking 
upon Him the nature of man. 
4. He recommends that His apostles speak with· 
out previous study. 
G. The forbidden Tree of Knowledge shows that 
wisdom is not for man. 
H. The Scriptures abundantly show that folly ex-
cuses transgressions. 
c 140 J 

ANALYSIS 
1. Aaron, Saul, and David made foolishness an 
effectual excuse. 
2. Christ asked pardon for His ignorant enemies. 
3. Paul obtained mercy for what he did in 
ignorance. 
[38] XIV. The Christian religion is akin to fol1y. (pp. 118-124) 
A. Children, women, the aged, and fools flock to 
church. 
B. The founders of the Church were enemies to 
learning. 
C. Zealous Christians are manifest fools. 
1. They give away their goods, forgive injuries, 
etc., in opposition to common sense. 
[39] 
D. The ultimate happiness sought by Christians is a 
kind of madness. 
1. Earthly preparations for this ultimate hap-
piness partake of madness. 
a. For the soul to be uneasy in the body is 
madness. 
b. Other people see the spiritual aims and 
contemplations of Christians as madness. 
c. Holy men lose their physical perceptions, 
appetites, and affections. 
d. The pious take more account of the in-
visible than of the visible. 
e. Christians are like Plato's lovers. 
(1) They are absent from themselves. 
2. The heavenly consummation of this happi-
ness accords with our definition of madness. 
a. The spirit first overmasters and swallows 
up the body. 
b. The spirit loses itself in the Supreme 
Mind. 
3. Moments of vision vouchsafed to the pious 
partake of madness. 
a. The pious soul is rapt from the body. 
b. The person becomes incoherent. 
[ a1 J 

THE PRAISE OF FOLLY 
c. Mterwards, he cannot remember what 
happened. 
d. He knows only that he was happy. 
Peroration (p. 125) 
[40] 
I. Folly makes no summary because she cannot re· 
member what she has said. 
II. Let votaries of Folly go on doing as they have done. 
[ 1-1-2 J 

Notes 
T
HE FOLLOWING NOTES SUPPLEMENT THE INFOR-
mation to be found in the "Index of Proper 
Names." Sources are given for important 
quotations. Erasmus's Latin often contains 
phrases, though not so indicated, from Horace, 
Cicero, Virgil, or Martial, and he frequently uses a single 
unusual Greek word or pair of words from Lucian, 
Aristophanes, or Homer. To annotate all of these echoes 
would be of no special service. The interested student will 
find most of them traced to their sources in the scholarly 
edition of Moriae Encomion by I. J. Kan (The Hague, 
1898). The proverbs Folly used are to be found, with com-
mentary, in Erasmus's Adagia; those already clear in 
meaning have been left unannotated here. All passages 
from the Bible are annotated. Erasmus used the Vulgate, 
but did not always quote accurately; in the text his Latin 
has been closely translated, and in the Notes will be 
found the corresponding passages as they appear in the 
King James version. 
PAGE 
2 great authors ••• Gnmius Cor«otta] Erasmus combines, in his list, 
mock-epics or other jewt d'esprit by poets and romancers with mock-
eulogies by rhetoricians. The poems he refers to are the pseudo-
Homeric BatrO&homyomtJ&hia or "Battle of the Frogs and the Mice," the 
Culex and Morelum which were attributed in his time to Virgil without 
question, and Ovid's Nux, now considered non-Ovidian. Seneca has 
traditionally been held author of Ap«ol«yntosis, or Ludus de Morte Claudii, 
translated as "The Pumpkinification of Claudius," a satire upon the 
apotheoses of emperors. For the other pieces see Index. 
[ 148 J 

NOTES 
PAGE 
4 June 9th) omitting the year given in the 1703 text, 1508, which is 
plainly wrong, though introduced in Froben's edition of 1522. It should 
probably be 1510, with 1511, the year of publication, as possible; 1509 
is virtually impossible, unless "June" is in error. The composition of the 
piece seems to belong to the late summer or autumn of 1509. 
10 imitate the rhetoricians I The practice of using Greek words and phrases 
in Latin compositions prevailed in academic oratory and writing 
throughout the sixteenth century. In The Praise of Folly Erasmus uses 
Greek more than eighty times, most frequently in the early pages. 
16 Sophocles ••• happiest") Ajax, line 554, translated by Trevelyan, 
"For the life that is unconscious is most sweet." 
18 
old gentleman in Plautus] Demipho in Mercator, II, ii, 31-33, tells 
Lysimachuil that he has begun going to school and has learned three 
letters; when Lysimachus asks, in surprise, what three letters, he replies, 
"a-m-o." Erasmus does not name the letters, here inserted by the trans-
lator. 
19 people of Brabant) Kan gives this Dutch proverb concerning Brabanters 
and Hollanders: 
Hoe ouder, hoe zotter Brabander; 
Hoe ouder, hoe hotter Hollander. 
I.e., "The older the foolisher, the Brabanter; the older the stupider, the 
Hollander." 
20 daughter of Memnon ••• Tithonus] Erasmus seems to err, since it is 
usually accounted that Aurora, mother of Memnon and consort of 
Tithonus, restored his youth. 
23 
Plato shows • , , rational creatures) An example of Folly's wresting of 
evidence, if Republic, V, 451, is referred to, as seems most likely. The 
question there is whether women shall undertake the duties of guardians 
of the state along with men. A figure is drawn from animals, but men are 
included in the figure; in Davis's translation: "Are we to reckon it 
proper for the females among our guardian dogs to watch and hunt, 
and do everything in common with the males; or rather to manage 
domestic affairs within doors, as being disabled from other exercises on 
account of bearing and nursing the whelps, while the males are to labor 
and take the entire charge of the flock? • . . Is it possible . . • to 
employ an animal for the same purpose [with another) without giving 
it the same nurture and education?" 
23 bull to the masseuse] The Latin is ad ceroma, that is, to the anointing-
place of athletes. 
[ 144 J 

NOTES 
PAGE 
26 ambiguous syllogisms) Crocodiletes, a kind of syllogism, according to the 
note of Listrius in the 1515 edition, named from the story of a crocodile 
which offered terms to the mother of a boy it had seized: "If you will 
tell me the truth," it said, "I will return your boy to you." She answered, 
"You will not return him. Now, since I have told the truth, return him." 
The crocodile answered, "No, if I were to return him, you would not 
have spoken the truth." 
26 none is born ••• of th4m) Though not so indicated, Erasmus is vir-
tually quoting Horace, Satires, I, iii, 68-69. 
30 poetic sentiment of Archilochus J In Plutarch's Instituta Laconica, 34, trans-
lated by Babbitt, Loeb Classical Library: "Archilochus the poet, when 
he arrived in Sparta, they ordered to depart that very instant because 
they learned that he had written in his verses that it is better to throw 
away one's arms than be killed." 
31 
struck dumb ••• a wolf) The Latin expression lupus infabu/a or lupus 
in sermone corresponds to our "Talk of the devil-" and indicates that, 
since the penon being talked about has appeared, the speaker breaks 
off in embarrassment. 
32 Quintilian interprets) Institutes, XI, i, 43-44; but Quintilian rather cites 
than commends Cicero here. 
32 saying of Plato's) Republic, V, 473. 
33 wolf in 1M story) See note to similar expression, above, p. 31. 
34 puerile story ••• horses' tails] (1) Livy tells (I, ii) that the Roman 
fathers overcame a seditious uprising by sending the orator Menenius 
Agrippa to speak to the people; he told the fable of how the members 
grumbled and mutinied against the belly, but when they found, with 
the sustenance provided by the belly cut off, that they grew weak, they 
were reconciled to their former position and duties. (2) The fable of the 
fox and hedgehog, used by Themistocles as an argument against chang-
ing governments, appears in Aristotle, Rh4toric, II, 20: the fox, mired in 
a bog and assailed by ticks, refused to allow the hedgehog to remove 
them, on the ground that these already had their fill of blood, whereas 
if they were removed the new· ticks that would follow would l:fe empty 
and ravenous. (3) Sertorius, in Plutarch's Lives, was a noble Roman 
general who pretended that his white hind had been given him by 
Diana and that it gave him valuable information about the plans of the 
enemy. (4) In Plutarch's De Puerorum Educatione is told the experiment 
of Lycurgus ("the Spartan") with "identical twins": he took two pup-
pies of the same litter and had them reared separately and differently, so 
that one became fierce and intractable, the other an obedient and ski!-
c 145 J 

NOTES 
PAGE 
ful hunter. (5) The last object-lesson comes also from Plutarch's account 
of Sertorius: to prove that good strategy could do more than mere 
strength, he set two men to pull out, respectively, the tails of two horses; 
one tried to pull the tail out all at once, and failed; the other, pulling a 
hair at a time, succeeded. 
36 
Homer seems • • • is done") Iliad, XVII, 32, translated by Lang, Leaf, 
and Myers: "By the event is even a fool made wise." 
36 fat Minerva) To do something crassa Minerva or pingue Minerva (with a 
stupid, or fat, Minerva) means, in Horace and elsewhere, to do it 
awkwardly or without niceties. 
37 
king ••• hostler) The word translated "hostler" is Dama, a type-
name used by Horace (Satires, I, vi; II, v) and Persius (Satire V) for a low-
born or mean fellow; apparently it was a name often given to slaves. 
41 
Aristophanes ••• toolless") Plutus, 266-67. 
42 
borrowed teeth • • • pig) The translation here departs from the 1703 
text and follows many earlier editions in reading a sue where 1703 has 
a se; to follow 1703 would give: "another enjoys the use of teeth he has 
got somewhere as a loan." 
45 
"The doctor ••• together") This line from the Iliad, XI, 514, Erasmus 
may have seen quoted in Plato's Symposium, 214B. 
49 
Alcibiades in Plato) Symposium, 217E. 
49 
Euripides witnesseth ••• things") Bacchae, 369. 
49 
Euripides mentions) Kan suggests line 394 of the pseudo-Euripidean 
Rhesus, where "double men" are mentioned. 
51 
Socrates teaches ••• two Venuses) Pausanius, rather than Socrates, is 
represented as making this distinction, Symposium, 180. 
51 
Horace ••• upon me") Odes, III, iv, 5-6. 
52 
Cicero ••• Atticus) Folly twists the evidence, unless Erasmus himself 
was mistaken. The passage referred to must be from the letters to At-
deus, III, xiii, 2: Nam, quod uribis te audire me etiam mentis errore ex do/ore 
adjici, mihi vero mens integra est. Atque utinam tam in periculo juisset I In the 
Loeb translation by Winstedt: "You say that you have heard that my 
mind is becoming unhinged with grief: my mind is sound enough. 
Would that it had been as sound in the hour of danger, ... " Only if 
thelastexpressionismadetorefer,asit can hardly do, to the earlier part 
of the preceding sentence, so that it would mean, "Would that it had 
been unhinged in the hour of danger," can Folly's interpretation be 
justified. 
52 
that Greek in Horace) Erasmus follows closely Horace's account, Epistles 
II. ii, 128-40. 
[ 146 J 

NOTES 
PAGE 
57 
seven verses • • • St. Bernard) The story was that a devil appeared to 
St. Bernard and told him that there were seven verses in the Psalms, the 
daily repetition of which would insure a person's salvation. St. Bernard 
replied that he would repeat all of the Psalms daily and thus be sure of 
saying the seven verses. The devil was so disconcerted by this suggestion 
that he revealed the effective verses. 
58 
"For if I ••• Jolly'') Erasmus adapts three lines of Virgil, Aeneid, VI, 
625-27; but where Virgil speaks of crimes and punishments (in connec-
tion with Aeneas's visit to the underworld), Erasmus substitutes fools 
and folly. 
59 King Arthur) The Latin is Arcturum, and perhaps the translation should 
be "the star Arcturus." For translating as "King. Arthur" we have this: 
Erasmus was writing in England, and he has said that some people trace 
their ancestry to Aeneas or to Brutus. A Brutus, supposed to have been 
a grandson of Aeneas, was the legendary founder of Britain; but at the 
time Erasmus wrote there was a tendency to exalt King Arthur, par-
ticularly because the Tudor kings, of Welsh extraction, were willing to 
believe they were in Arthur's descent. King Henry VII named his first 
son Arthur. Also, Arcturus is a possible variant of Arturus. For translating 
as "the star Arcturus" we have Kan's suggestion that Erasmus had in 
mind the phrase from Cicero, De Natura Deorum, II, xlii, 110, Stella 
micans radiis, Arcturus nomine claro. 
Wilson translates, "the Star by the Tail of Ursa Major"; Kennett, 
"king Arthur." 
64 a man of my name) Thomas More, as the puns on More and Moria in the 
Preface indicate. 
65 
And of course ••• hangmen) Kan points out that many editors, but 
without good authority, insert a non before the verb of this sentence; 
Wilson so translates: "to say nothing ofthose mischievous gods, Plutoes, 
Ates," etc. 
70 curses ••• Greek epigram) Greek Anthology, IX, 173, by Palladas of 
Alexandria (tr. by Paton, Loeb Classical Library): "The beginning of 
grammar [i.e., of the Iliad) is a curse in five lines. The first has the word 
'wrath,' the second 'pernicious,' and after that 'many woes' of the 
Greeks; the third 'leads down souls to Hades'; to the fourth belong 
'spoil' and 'dogs'; to the fifth 'birds' of ill-omen and the 'anger of Zeus.' 
How, then, can a grammarian avoid having many sorrows after five 
curses and five cases {falls)?" 
71 
ass in Aesop) Perhaps in the fable of the ass in the lion's skin; though 
the fable of the ass attempting to be a lap-dog would answer as well. 
[ 147 J 

NOTES 
PAGE 
71 
bubsequa • • • manticulator] The three words, of rare or obscure 
occurrence, mean, respectively, "herdsman," "blusterer'' or "ter-
giversator," and "pickpocket." 
73 free souls • • • proverb) The proverb ia phrased by Horace, Epistola ad 
Pisones ("Art of Poetry"), 9-10: Pictoribus atque poetis/ Quidlibet audendi 
semPer juit aequa potestas. Lucian alludes to the saying in his Defence of the 
Portraits, 18. 
79-80 "Faith is ••• not seen"] Hebrews, xi, 1, as here. 
80 "God is ••• in truth") John iv, 24, as here. 
81 
"strifes of words")2 Timothy ii, 14: "charging them before the Lord 
that they strive not about words to no profit"; ibid., 23: "But foolish and 
unlearned questions .avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes." For 
genealogies, mentioned a little earlier, see 1 Timothy, i, 4. 
84 matula putes • • • ollam fervere) The meaning of the phrases is of no 
special pertinence: the first might be translated as "pot, you stink," the 
second as "the pot stinks"; ollaefervere ia of no recognizable construction, 
but may possibly have been intended to represent the meaning of our 
phrase, "to boil the kettle"; ollamfervere is simply "the kettle boils." 
85 "ineffable Four Letters") In Hebrew tradition, four consonants which 
represented the name of God, not to be pronounced; Jehovah. 
89 Horace," What • • • about?" J Satires, II, vii, 21: quorsum haec tam putida 
tend ant? 
91 
imitating ••• Sagana] The allusion ia to Horace, Satires, I, viii, in 
which Priapus tells of witnessing the nocturnal rites and sorceries of 
Canidia and Sagana, women represented as hag-like witches. At the 
height of the ceremonies Priapus broke wind. 
91 
august titles ••• Invincible Doctors) Erasmus is satirizing the custom 
of giving epithets to well-known theologians; Thomas Aquinas was 
"the angelic doctor," Duns Scotus was "the subtle doctor," William of 
Occam was "the invincible doctor," St. Francis was "the seraphic 
father." 
92 
their chimera ••• Humano capite, etc.) The reference is to the opening of 
Horace's Epistola ad Pisones (Epistles, II, iii), usually called his "Art of 
Poetry;" He ia warning against incongruity in poetry and draws an 
analogy from painting (tr. by Lonsdale and Lee): "If a painter were to 
try to unite a man's head on a horse's neck, or to put parti-colored 
feathers on limbs collected from every kind of animal, so that, for in-
stance, a woman fair to the waist were to end foul in the tail of an ugly 
fish; if admitted to view, my friends, could you restrain your laughter?" 
The Latin begins: Humano capite cervicem pictor equinam. 
c 148 J 

NOTES 
PAGE 
96 "suitors of Pnulope •.• Echo) Erasmus refers to Horace, Epistles, I, 
ii, 28Jf. The particular verse he begins to quote is sponsi Penelopae, 
nebulones Alcinoique, and the whole passage reads (tr. by Lonsdale and 
Lee): "Penelope's suitors, and the young courtiers of Alcinous, who 
employed themselves more than was proper in attending to their bodily 
pleasures; who thought it seemly to slumber till noon, and to charm 
their care to sink to rest at the music of the lyre." The suitors are sim-
ilarly described in the Odyssey, II, 74jf. The statement that Echo can 
give the other half of the verse is obscure; Erasmus may be suggesting 
that the word nebulones gives the echo llvos, Greek for "ass," or that the 
ending of Alcinoique sounds like "Echo." In his colloquy entitled "Echo" 
he twice uses oblique forms of ll110s as an echo, first for eruditionis and 
then for Cicerone. 
97 
what ••• "bishop" means) The word "bishop" is from the Greek, 
•· hrluKoros, overseer, inspector, or guardian. 
100 weapons and sweet bnudictionsJ 2 CorinthitJns vi, 4, 6-7: "But in all 
things approving ourselves as the ministers of God . • • by pureness, by 
knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love 
unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armor of 
righteousness on the right hand and on the left." For weapons, cf. 
Romans xiii, 12: "let liS therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let 
us put on the armor oflight''; 2 Corinthians x, 4: "For the weapons of our 
warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of 
strongholds"; Ephesians vi, 11-17, describing "the whole armor of God," 
and naming the several weapons. For blessings, cf. also Romans xii, 14: 
"Bless them which persecute you: bless and curse not." 
F. M. Nichols, in The Epistles of Erasmus (1904), II, 7, translates this 
part of the sentence, "There remain only arms, and those 'fair speeches' 
of which Paul makes mention," and cites (following Kan) Romans xvi, 
18. But so to translate is to lose the irony ofthe passage; and the quota-
tions listed above justify an ironical reading. 
tOO pictured damnations) A note by Listrius, in the Basle, 1515, edition, 
explains that pictures were sometimes published of those whom the 
Pope excommunicated, showing them surrounded by flame and devils. 
100 Peter's •.• followed thee") Matthew xix, 27. 
103 "The owl .flies'') A proverbial token of victory in Athens; the owl was 
Athena's bird. 
103 "He ••• fourth month") A portent of a difficult, laborious life, be-
cause Hercules was supposed to have been bom in that month. 
r 149 J 

NOTES 
PAGE 
105 fat, sleek hog ••• season") Erasmus is referring to Horace's own 
words concerning himself. The pertinent passages, including the follow-
ing quotations, are as follows (translated by Lonsdale and Lee): 
Epistles I, iv, 15-16: "Myself you will find plump and sleek, in high con-
dition, when you wish to laugh at a hog from the sty ofEpicurus"; Odes, 
IV, xii, 27-28: "mix with your meditations a brief folly; 'tis sweet at 
fitting time to lose our wisdom." Erasmus errs in attributing the second 
quotation to "elsewhere." 
105 
"had rather he giddy •.. fret") Horace, Epistles, II, ii, 126-28 (trans-
lated by Lonsdale and Lee): "But yet, better be thought a silly and dull 
poet, provided my own faults please me, or at least escape me, than to 
be ever so sensible, and to chafe in one's spirit." 
105 
Cicero ••• fools"] Epistolae ad Familiares, IX, xxii, 4. 
106 "The number • • • infinite") &clesiastes i, 15: "that which is wanting 
cannot be numbered." The Latin of the Vulgate is as Erasmus quotes 
it: stultorum in.finitus est numerus. 
106 "Every man •• , wisdom"] Jeremiah x, 14: "Every man is brutish in 
his knowledge." 
106 "Let not .•• wisdom"] Jeremiah ix, 23: "Let not the wise man glory 
in his wisdom." 
106 
"Vani~ . •• vani~"] Ecclesiastes i, 2: "Vanity of vanities, saith the 
Preacher, vanity of vanities; all is vanity." Also xii, 8. 
107 
"the fool is ••• sun"] &clesiasticus xxvii, 12: "The discourse of a 
godly man is always with wisdom, but a fool's changeth as the moon." 
The Latin of the Vulgate contains a reference to the sun: Homo sanctus 
in sapientia manet sicut sol, etc. 
107 "A fool ••• folly"] Proverbs xv, 21: "Folly is joy to him that is des-
titute of wisdom." 
107 "He that ••• gruf"] &clesiastes i, 18: "Forin much wisdom is much 
grief; and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow." 
107 "The heart . • • follows mirth"] &clesiastes vii, 4: "The heart of the 
wise is in the house of mourning; but the heart offools is in the house of 
mirth." 
107 "I gave ••• folly'') &clesiastes i, 17, as here. 
108 "Buckets ••• Aristotle] Erasmus means, obviously, that cheap, com-
mon vessels are left carelessly about; but as Aristotle used the proverb 
in his Rhetoric (I, 6) the meaning was not this. The following is Lane 
Cooper's translation and (in brackets) his comment: "And hence, too, 
the proverb about 'breaking the pitcher at the door' [after the trouble 
and toil of filling and fetching it]." 
[ 150 J 

NOTES 
PAGE 
108 "Betl#r is ••• wisdom"] &elesiastiau xx, 33: "Better is he that hideth 
his folly than a man that hideth his wisdom." · 
108 "A fool ••• fools"] &c/esiastlsx, 3: "Yea also, when he that is a fool 
walketh by the way, his wisdom faileth him, and he saith to every one 
that he is a fool." 
108 "1 am ••• men"] Proverbs xxx, 2: "Surely I am more brutish than 
any man, and have not the understanding of a man." 
108-9 "1 speak ••• more"] Because of the extended discussion, the con-
text may be given; 2 Corinthians xi, 21-23: "I speak as concerning re-
proach, as though we had been weak. Howbeit whereinsoever any is 
bold, (I speak foolishly) I am bold also. Are they [i.e., "false apostles, 
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into apostles of Christ"] 
Hebrews? so am I. Are they Israelites? so am I. Are they the seed of 
Abraham? so am I. Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool) I am 
more; in labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons 
more frequent, in deaths oft." 
109 a certain renowned divine] As the proverb presently quoted indicates, 
Erasmus refers to Nicholas de Lyra; see Index. 
110 "to the Unknown God'') Acts xvii, 23: "For as I passed by, and beheld 
your devotions, I found an altar with this inscription, TO THE UN-
KNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare 
I unto you." 
111 
"But now, he ••• one"] With context, Luke xxii, 35-36: "And he 
said unto them, When I sent you without purse, and scrip, and shoes, 
lacked ye anything? And they said, Nothing. Then said he unto them, 
But now he that hath a purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip: and 
he that hath no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one." In the 
exegesis put in the mouth of Folly, Erasmus seems to imply that tol/at 
(translated in the text as "take") means "remove" or "dispense with." 
The word allows such an interpretation, since its meaning embraces 
both "take up" or "carry" and "take away" or "remove." 
113 "the skins ••• shaken") Habakkuk iii, 7: "I saw the tents of Cushan 
in aftliction: and the curtains ofthe land ofMidian did tremble." 
113 "A man ••• rdect"l Titus iii, 10, as here. The story Erasmus tells 
about the interpretation of devita is a true one, told to him, according to 
his note on this verse in his New Testament, by John Colet, who had 
heard the interpretation made. 
113 the word ••• devita) This phrase inserted by the translator. 
113 "Thou shalt • • • to live''] Exodus xxii, 18, as here. 
114 using maldicus as above) Inserted by the translator. 
[ 151 J 

NOTES 
PAGE 
114 "Suffer fools gladly"] 2 Corinthians xi, 19: "For ye suffer fools gladly, 
seeing ye yourselves are wise." 
114 "Receive me as a fool"] 2 Corinthians xi, 16: "I say again, let no man 
think me a fool; if otherwise, yet as a fool receive me, that I may boast 
myself a little." 
114 "I do not ••• foolishness"] 2 Corinthians xi, 17: "That which I speak, 
I speak it not after the Lord, but as it were foolishly, in this confidence 
of boasting." 
114 "We are fools for Christ's sake"] 1 Corinthians iv, 10, as here. 
114 "Let him ••• wise"] 1 Corinthians iii, 18: "If any man among you 
seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be 
wisee'' 
114 two disciples ••. ''fools"] Luke xxiv, 25: "Then he said unto them, 
0 fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken." 
114 " The foolishness • • • men"] 1 Corinthians i, 25, as here. 
114 " The preaching • • • foolishness"] 1 Corinthians i, 18, as here. 
115 "Thou knowest my foolishness"] Psalms lxix, 5, as here; usually taken, 
however, as the psalmist's personal expression. 
115 "God has • • • world''] 1 Corinthians i, 27: "But God hath chosen the 
foolish things of the world to confound the wise." 
115 "It has ••. foolishness"] 1 Corinthians i, 21: "For after that in the 
wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by 
the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe." 
115 "I will destroy •.• prudent"] Isaiah xxix, 14: "for the wisdom of their 
wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall 
be hid." 
115 gave thanlcs ••• babes] Matthew xi, 25: "I thank thee, 0 Father, 
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the 
wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes." 
115 "Woe unto .•• Pharisees"] Luke xi, 44, as here; cf. xii, 42, 43, and 
Matthew xxiii, 27. 
116 "J!ehold the Lamb of God"] John i, 29 and 36, as here. 
116 "the wisdom of the Father"] 1 Corinthians i, 24: "But unto them which 
are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wis-
dom of God." See also i, 18. 
116 
made "to be .rin"]2 Corinthians v, 21: "For he hath made him to be sin 
for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God 
in him." 
116 "the foolishness of the cross"] Not .a quotation; Kan suggests it is 
adapted from "the foolishness of preaching," 1 Corinthians i, 21; more 
[ 152 J 

NOTES 
PAGE 
likely, however, from Galatians v, 11; "Then is the offense of the cross 
ceased," or 1 Corinthians i, 18: "For the preaching ofthe cross is to them 
that perish foolishness," or i, 23: "But we preach Christ crucified ••• 
unto the Greeks foolishness." 
117 mountain ••• Lucifer]Isaiah xiv, 12, 13: "How art thou fallen from 
heaven, 0 Lucifer ... For thou hast said in thine heart ... I will 
sit also upon the mount of the congregation." 
117 "[ beseech .•. charge"] Numbers xii, 11: "And Aaron said unto 
Moses, Alas, my lord, I beseech thee, lay not the sin upon us, wherein 
we have done foolishly, and wherein we have sinned." 
117 "For it • • • foolishly"]1 Samuel xxvi, 21: "Behold, I have played the 
fool, and have erred exceedingly." 
117 "But I pray ••• joolishly"]1 Chronicles xxi, 8: "But now, I beseech 
thee, do away the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very 
foolishly." 
117 "Father, forgive ••. do"] Luke xxiii, 34, as here. 
117 "But therefore ••• unbeliej"]1 TimotJv> i, 13: "but I obtained mercy, 
because I did it ignorantly in unbelief." 
118 "&member not ••• ignorances"] Psalms xxv, 7: "Remember not the 
sins of my youth, nor my transgressions." 
119 Plato defined ••. death"] Phaedo, 80-81. 
123 Plato ..• state of all"] Phaedrus, 244. 
124 "Eye hath not •.• Him"]1 Corinthians ii, 9, as here. 
124 that "good part .•. away"] The Latin is haec est Moriae pars, quae 
non aufertur, etc. That there is a serious pun intended between Moriae 
and Mariae, identifying "the portion of Folly" with that "good part" 
chosen by Mary, sister of Martha, in Luke x, 42, is indicated by quae 
non alffertur, which resembles the wording of the Vulgate. In English 
the verse reads: "But one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that 
good part, which shall not be taken away from her." Most texts con-
sulted, including those of best authority, read Moriae pars. Mariae is the 
reading, however, ofthe edition printed by Jacob Mark, Leyden, 1627, 
and the Oxford edition of 1663 {wrongly dated, 1633). This last may 
account fur the fact that Wilson translates the phrase as "that Mary's 
better part"; Kennett, as "that better part which Mary chose." 
[ 158 J 


Index of Proper Names 
TH THE NAMES APPEARS A MINIMUM OF 
explanation pertinent to Erasmus's use 
of them; (note) after a page-reference 
indicates that additional comment will 
be found in the Notes, introduced by 
thatpage-number.ReferencestotheDeityand toFollyher-
self, are omitted, as are the names of gods when used in 
oaths, books of the Bible, and a few capitalized adjectives. 
AtZTon, 117 (note) 
Academics, philosophic followers of 
Plato or of the later Platonic 
Academies, 63 
Aearnania, part of Epirus in Greece, 
the modem Carnia, classically 
famous for its pigs, 19 
Achilles, 18, 47 
Adam, 80 
Ad Herennium, a Latin instruction-
book in rhetoric, for long at-
tributed to Cicero; by Erasmus's 
time his authorship was ques-
tioned, 73 
Adonis, gardens of, for long a pro-
verbial and poetic expression for 
beautiful pleasure-gardens, 12 
Aeneas, 51, 59 (note) 
Aesop, 71 (note) 
Africa, 71 
Ajax, 47 
Albertists, scholastic followers of 
Albertus Magnus, a Bavarian 
schoolman of the thirteenth cen-
tury, 79,82 
Aleaeus, Greek lyric poet of the 
~eventh century B.c., 75 
Alcibiades, 
young nobleman of 
Athens, friend to Socrates and 
one of the interlocutors in Plato's 
Symposiu~, where he drew the 
analogy from the images of 
Silenus, 36, 49 
Aldus, Aldo Manuzio, or Aldus 
Manutius (1450-1515), Venetian 
scholar and printer, founder of 
the Aldine Press; Erasmus had 
been living and working with 
him just before writing this book; 
the reference to him is jocular, 72 
Amphion,legendary Greek musician, 
supposed to have brought to-
gether, by playing his lyre, stones 
for the original walls of Thebes; 
his musical power is sometimes 
rationalized, as here, to mean 
eloquence, 34 
Anauis foetida, the bean trefoil, 
proverbial for its unsavoriness, 77 
Anchises, father of Aeneas in Virgil; 
the question about his mother is 
imitated from Juvenal's (Satier 
VII, 234) about the nurse of 
Anchises, and from Suetonius' 
c 11S5 J 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
(Tiberiru, lxx, 3) about the 
mother of Hecuba, 71 
~ia, or Madness,. attendant of 
Folly, 13, 15 
A.nti-Joves, Latin Vejoves; Vejovis 
was a god having attributes the 
reverse of Jove's, 65 
A.ntlwnies, probably St. Anthony of 
Padua (1195-1231) is referred to, 
since he was famed for his elo-
quent preaching, 93 
Antony, Marcus Antonius (B.C. 83-
30), Roman general, 115 
Apelles, famed Greek painter, fourth 
century B.c., 64 
Aphrodite, d. also Venus, 21 
Apollo, cf. also Phoebus, 31, 65 
Apuleiru (Lucius), Roman satirist 
and philosopher (born ?125), 
author of The Golden Ass, 2 
ArchilO&hru, Greek poet, said to have 
been inventor of iambic satirical 
verse, 30 (note) 
Argos, city of Peloponnesus, having 
Juno as tutelar goddess, 6 7 
Argru, sentinel with a hundred 
eyes, appointed by Juno to 
watch lo when Jupiter was in 
love with her, 27, 68 
Aristophanes, Greek writer of com-
edies (B.C. ?448-?380), among 
them Plutus, 12, 41 
Aristotle, 34, 81, 108 (note), 116 
Arthur, King, 59 (note) 
Ate, goddess of revenge and discord, 
21, 65 
JUhmi.an, 30 
Athens, 32, 67 
Atlas, 83 
Atticru (T. Pomponius), friend of 
Cicero, 52 
Augrutine (St.), a father of the 
church (354-450), 84 
Augrutinians, members of orders 
following rule of Augustine, 87 
Aurora, goddess of dawn, 19 
Baal, 89 
Babylon, 71 
Babylonian, 89 
Bacchru, 13, 20, 65 
Barbara (St.), virgin and martyr of 
obscure tradition, 56, 63 
Bartlwlomew 
(St.), one of the 
Apostles, supposed to have met 
his martyrdom by being flayed, 
113 
Basil (St.), a father of the church 
(?329-379), 82 
Basilides, heretic of the second cen-
tury, who constructed a system of 
365 heavens; Erasmus's Latin, 
Abraxasiorum coelos, refers to the 
Abraxas, a numerical symbol or 
talisman of Basilides, 88 
Benedictines, members of the con-
gregation following the rule of 
St. Benedict of Nursia, instituted 
about 525, 87 
Bernard (St.), cf. next entry, 57 
(note), 117 
Bernardines, members of the branch 
of the Cistercian order founded 
(1115) by St. Bernard of Clair-
vaux,87 
Brabant, formerly a duchy of Neth-
erlands, later divided between 
Holland and Belgium, 19 
Brabanters, 19 (note) 
Bridgetines, members of an order 
founded by St. Bridget or Bride 
(453-523), patroness of Ireland; 
Kan points out that the form 
used by Erasmus, Brigidenses, in-
dicates the Irish saint rather than 
St. Brigit or Birgitta of Sweden; 
otherwise, the translation should 
read Brigittines, 87 
Brutru 
(legendary 
founder 
of 
Britain), 59 (note) 
Brutru (Marcus Junius), Roman 
politician (a.c. 85-42), one o£ 
c 156 J 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
·the assassins of Caesar; com-
mitted suicide, 32, 41, 115 
Busiris, cruel Egyptian tyrant of the 
early Greek period; his name be-
came a synonym for tyranny, 2, 9 
Callimachus, Greek poet in Egypt 
(B.c. ?320-?240), librarian of 
Ptolemy II, 75 
Camarina, Lake, a stinking lake in 
Sicily; people of the city near by 
drained the lake in spite of being 
forbidden to do so by Apollo; 
across the lake-bed enemies en-
tered and sacked the city; hence 
the proverb, Camarinam ne moueas, 
meant "Be not the cause of thy 
own ruin," 77 
Canidia, 91 (note) 
Carthusians, members of an austere 
order founded in the Chartreuse, 
near Grenoble, France; Eras-
mus's respect for this order was 
shared by Thomas More who, as 
a young man, lived four years in 
the Charterhouse (Carthusian 
monastery) of London; Erasmus 
glances obliquely at the Car-
thusian practice of silence, 102 
Cassius (Gaius), Roman leader, one 
of Caesar's assassins; committed 
suicide, B.c. 42, 32, 41, 115 
Cato (Marcus Porcius), "the elder" 
(B.C. 234-149), also called "the 
censor"; the story was often told 
of his walking out of a theater in 
the micbt of a performance, as a 
rebuke, 33 
Cato (Marcus Porcius, of Utica), 
"the younger" 
(B.C. 
95-46), 
philosopher, patriot and soldier; 
his suicide is graphically re-
counted by Plutarch, 41 
Catos, the, see previous entries, 32 
Chaldeans, classically considered in-
ventors of astronomy and as-
trology, 44 
Chaos, original disordered matter 
of the universe, personified as 
parent of the earliest gods, 11 
Chiron, the centaur, teacher of 
Achilles and others; accidentally 
wounded by Hercules' arrow, he 
suffered but could not die, since 
he was immortal; wishing release 
from pain, he transferred his im-
mortality to Prometheus; in 
Lucian's Dialogues of the Dead 
Chiron tells Menippus why he 
preferred not to be immortal, 41 
Christopher (St.), patron saint of 
travellers, 
pictured 
bearing 
Christ (in the form of a child) on 
his shoulders; since he was drawn 
with but one eye showing and 
carrying a huge staff, Erasmus 
calls him Polyphemus, 56, 63 
Chrysippean, cf. next entry, 81 
Chrysippus, Stoic philosopher and 
logician, student of Zeno's, sup-
posed to have written 705 works, 
114 
Chrysostom (St.), Greek father of the 
Church (?347-407), 82 
Cicero (Marcus Tullius), 31, 32, 33, 
52 (note), 75, 91, 93, 105 (note), 
106 
Cilician from Cilicia, a country in 
Asia Minor; cloth of Cilician 
goat's hair was coarse and rough, 
86 
Circe, sorceress in the Odyssey, X; 
changed men into beasts by her 
enchantments, 19 
Claudius, Emperor, Tiberi us Claudius 
Drusus Nero Germanicus {B.C. 
10-A.D. 54), 2 
Coletes, 
members of an order 
founded by St. Coleta (1380-
1447), a lady of Picardy, 87 
[ 157 J 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
Comus, or Intemperance, attendant 
ofFolly, 13 
Corddiers, members of the Fran-
ciscan order, so called from their 
girdles of knotted cord, 87 
Croesus, Lydian king famed for his 
wealth, 53 
' 
Crutched, or Crossed (friars), mem-
bers of an English order, so called 
because of crosses on their staves 
and garments, 87 
Cupid, 21, 27, 51 
Cyprus, 67 
David, 117 (note) 
Decii, the, an early Decius gave his 
life for Rome in the Latin War; 
his son did as much in the Es-
truscan War; and a grandson, in 
the war against Pyrrhus, 34 
Delos, an island in the Aegean Sea, 
birthplace of Apollo and Diana, 
anciently thought to be a floating 
island, 12 
Democritus, of Abdera (B.C. ?460-
362), Greek atomistic philos-
opher, known as "the laughing 
philosopher," 2, 35, 67, 70 
Demosthenes, Athenian orator (B.c. 
?384-322), supposed to have fled 
from the battlefield of Chaeronea, 
30, 32, 91, 93 
Diana, 21, 66 
Didymus, grammarian of the time of 
Augustus, supposed to have writ-
ten 3000 or 4000 books, 114 
Diogenes, the Cynic, philosopher of 
Athens; according to one of sev-
eral stories (Diogenes Laertius 
VI, 76-77), he died voluntarily by 
holding his breath, 41 
Dionysius, the name of two famous 
tyrants of Sicily; Plato gave ad-
vice concerning government to 
Dionysius the younger, and al-
most lost his life as a result, 71, 
115 
Dodona, city on the border of Thes-
saly, famous for its fountain and 
grove in which was a temple of 
Jupiter; the oracle answered by 
a wind through the trees, and 
brass vessels or gongs were hung 
on the trees to increase the sound, 
76 
Donatus (Aelius), Roman gram-
marian (fl. 305), whose work was 
a standard textbook throughout 
the Middle Ages, 71 
Drunkenness, a nymph, nurse and 
attendantofFolly, 13 
Echo, 96 (note) 
Egypt, 89 
Elysian Fields, 50 
Endym'ion, young shepherd beloved 
of Diana, 21 
England, 1 
English, 61 
Epicurus, Greek philosopher (B.C. 
?342-270), founder of Epicurean 
school of thought, 105 (note) 
Epidaurian serpent, Erasmus borrows 
both the eagle and the serpent 
from Horace, Satires, I, iii, 27; 
Epidauris was a city in Pelopon-
nesus; the serpents were sacred to 
Aesculapius, 27 
Erasmus (St.), the most prominent 
of the several saints of this name 
is Erasmus of Formia (called in 
Italy St. Elmo), a bishop in the 
region of Antioch, martyred in 
303; the reference is of course 
equivocal, 56 
Erasmus (Desiderius), 103, 109 
Eucharist, the, sacrament central to 
the Mass, 78, 80, 122 
Euclid, Greek philosopher, founder 
of geometry (fl. B.C. 400), 60 
[ 158 J 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
Euripides, Greek writer of tragedies 
(B.c. 480-406), 49 (notes) 
Fates, 41 
Favorinus, Roman philosopher or 
Sophist living in Gaul, second 
century A.D., wrote eulogies of 
Thersites and the quartan fever, 
2 
Febris, goddess of fever, or averter 
offever, 65 
Festus, Roman provincial governor, 
who said after Paul's defence 
(Acts xxvi): "Paul, thou art be-
side thyself; much learning doth 
make thee mad," 119 
Flora, Roman goddess of flowers, 
whose festival, was a time of 
licentiousness, 21 
Fortunate Isles, in Greek and later 
legend, islands far in the western 
ocean, home of favored mortals 
on whom the gods had bestowed 
immortality, 12, 17, 30 
Fortune, goddess of, 103 
Frenchmen, 61 
Furies, the, three in number, came 
from Hades to pursue and drive 
to madness people guilty of out-
rageous crimes, 51, 55, 100 
George (St.), of Cappadocia, patron 
saint of England, of whom little 
is known; supposed to have lived 
in third and early fourth cen-
turies, 56 
Germans, 61 63, 101 
Gesta Romanorum, "Deeds of the 
Romans," a Latin collection of 
tales and anecdotes compiled 
about 1300; an English transla-
tion was published by Wynkyn 
de Warde about the time The 
Praise of Folly was written, 91 
Giants, sons of Titan and Tellus, 
waged 
an 
unsuccessful 
war 
against the Olympian gods, 47 
Glaueon, made a case for injustice in 
the second book of Plato's Re-
public, 2 
Gorgon, the head of Medusa, worn 
by Pallas on her shield, said to 
turn the beholder into stone, 21 
Gracchi, the, Tiberius Gracchus 
(B.c. ?153-121) and his brother, 
Gaius Gracchus (B.C. ?162-133), 
liberal political leaders in Rome, 
killed as rousers of sedition, 32 
Greeklings, 
translating 
Graeculi, 
Folly's contemptuous name for 
Biblical interpreters who know 
Greek; she puns with graculi, 
grackles, 1 09 
Greeks, 10, 24, 27, 42, 44, 61, 65, 72 
Grunnius Corocotta (Porcellus), fic-
tional name of a pig, whose last 
will and testament was written in 
verse by an unknown author and, 
according to St. Jerome (ed. 
J.-P. Migne, Patrologia Latina, 
IV, 491), sung or recited by 
schoolboys, 2 
Gryllus, subject of a dialogue by 
Plutarch, the interlocutors being 
Circe, Ulysses, and the talking 
pig, Gryllus, who formerly had 
been a man, 2, 4 7 
Harpocrates, god of silence, 22 
Hebrews, cf. also Jews, 85 (note), 
90,113 
Hedone, or Pleasure, attendant of 
Folly, 13 
Helicon, one of the peaks of Parnas-
sus, home of Apollo and the 
Muses, 38, 1 05 
Hercules, 8, 56 
Hermogenes, Marcus Hermogenes 
Tigellius, a remarkable Roman 
singer, friend of Julius and 
Augustus Caesar, often men-
tioned by Horace; see especially 
Satires, I, ix, 25, 60 
c 169 J 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
Huiod, one of the earliest Greek 
poets, fl. eighth century B.c., 1 1 
Hippolytus, son of Theseus, killed 
when fledng from his father, 
restored to life by Aesculapius, 56 
Hollam:/ers, 19 (note) 
Homer, cf."also Iliad, 2 (note), 7, 11, 
12, 18, 21, 22, 36 (note), 45 
(note), 47, 65, 70 (note), 105 
Horace, 26 (note), 51 (note), 52 
(note), 62, 89 (note), 92 (note), 
105 (note) 
Iapetus, son of Titan and Terra, 
father of Prometheus, and fabled 
founder of Greece, 1 1 
/gnora~e, a nymph, nurse and at-
tendant of Folly, 13 
Iliad, cf. also Homer, 73, 105 
Irishman, 30 
lson-aus, Greek rhetorician and 
teacher (:s.c. 436-338); wrote a 
eulogy of Busirus, which begins 
with a criticism of that by Poly-
crates on the same subject; 
author of many speeches and 
teacher of speakers, he never 
made public speeches because of 
nervousness and a weak voice, 2, 
31 
Italians, 30, 61 
Italy, 1 
Jacobines, 
Dominican friars, 
so 
named because the first Do-
minican convent in Paris stood by 
the Church of St. Jacques, 87 
James, St., shrine of, the shrine of St. 
James (the Apostle) was at Com-
postela in Spain, whither his 
body was supposed to have been 
transported miraculously, 70 
Jerome (St.), Sophronius Eusebius 
Hieronymus (?340-420), Latin 
father of the Church, maker of 
the Vulgate version of the Bible, 
2, 4, 82, 84, 110 
Jerusalem, 70 
Jews, cf. also Hebrews, 61, 82,88 
John, the Baptist, 160 
Jove, cf. also Jupiter, 11, 12, 14, 21, 
39, 40, 48, 65, 96 
Julius Caesar, 115 
Juno, 67 
Jupiter, cf. also jove, 12, 13, 22, 65, 
67, 84 
Juvenal, Decius Junius Juvenalis 
(c.60-c.140), Roman writer of 
satires in verse, famed for scur-
rilous exposure of vices, 4 
Kolakia, or Flattery, attendant of 
Folly, 13, 21, 62, 73 
Laelius, friend of Scipio Africanus, 
praised as a wise speaker by 
Cicero and for wisdom by 
Horace, Satires, II, i, 72, 73 
Laertes, father of Ulysses; his name 
mentioned as a literary pseu· 
donym, 75 
Lampsacus, city at mouth of Helles-
pont, famed for worship of 
Priapus, 67 
Latins, 10, 72 
Lethe (river), fabled river of the 
underworld, from which the 
newly arrived spirits drink for-
getfulness of their past existence, 
17 
Lethe, or Forgetfulness, attendant of 
Folly, 13, 15 
Lucian, late Greek satirical writer 
(see 
introductory essay, 
pp. 
xvii-xx), wrote a mock-eulogy 
of a fly and a Platonic dialogue 
extolling parasitism; see also 
Pythagoras, 
Momus, 
Timon, 
Chiron, Micyllus, Menippus, 4, 
64, 106 
Lucifer, 117 (note) 
Lucretius, Titus Lucretius Carus 
(B.c. 96-55), Roman poet whose 
De Rerum Natura opens with an 
c 160 J 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
invocation to Venus as creatrix 
of all things, 15 
Lynceus, one of the Argonauts, so 
quick-sighted that he could see 
at 130 miles distance, and 
through rocks or trees, 39, 77, 79 
L.Jra 
(Nicholas de), 
mediaeval 
theologian (died 1340) of great 
learning, author of many Biblical 
commentaries, 110 (note) 
Malea, 
promontory of Greece, 
dangerous to navigation; there is 
a pun on Malea and alea (dice), 
55 
Marcus AUTelius (Antoninus), Stoic 
philosopher and Roman em· 
peror (121-180); his son, the em-
peror Commodus, is famed for 
his cruelty and outrageous vices, 
32 
Marpesian (stone), marble from 
Marpesia; the whole phrase, 
beginning with "as if," is from 
Virgil, Aeneid, VI, 471, describ-
ing the shade of Dido when ap-
proached by Aeneas, 39 
Mars, 65, 82 
Medea, wicked sorceress of Colchis; 
restored jason's father, Aeson, to 
youth by draining his blood and 
pouring in a magic preparation, 
19 
Megarians, people of Megara, city 
between Athens and Corinth; in 
his Adagia Erasmus shows that 
the Megarians were held in low 
esteem, that there was "nothing 
to say" about them, 30 
Memnon, Ethiopian king, son of 
Aurora and Tithonus, killed in 
the Trojan War, 20 (note) 
Menippus, character in Lucian's 
/caromenippus and many other 
dialogues; in the one named he 
took a trip to the moon and 
viewed the world, 70 
Mercury, 22, 65 
Micyllus, 
cobbler 
in 
Lucian's 
dialogue, The Dream, or the Cock, 
and elsewhere in the same au-
thor; his dream was that he had 
exchanged places with a wealthy 
man and was surrounded by 
gold, 64 
Midas, foolish king in Greek legend; 
awarding Pan the victory over 
Apollo in a musical contest, he 
was given ass's ears, 8, 10 
Milesian virgins, at a certain period 
almost all the maidens of Miletus 
conceived a desire to die, and 
many of them committed suicide, 
41 
Milesian wool, garments of soft wool 
from Miletus were in great es-
teem at Rome, 86 
Minerva, cf. also Pallas, 10, 29, 36 
(note), 67 
Minims, members of an austere 
order 
of 
mendicant 
friars 
founded by St. Francis of Paola, 
87 
Minors, members of one of the three 
orders founded by St. Francis of 
Assisi, 87 
Minos, king and lawgiver of early 
Crete; after his death made chief 
judge in Hades, 34 
Misoponia, or Laziness, attendant 
of Folly, 13 
Momus, god of carpers; Erasmus 
borrows from the account of 
Lucian in Hermotimus and else-
where, 21, 22 
More, (St.) Thomas, 1-4, 64 (note) 
Morychus, according to Erasmus, a 
nickname for Bacchus; in his 
Adagia he points out, truly, that 
there was a proverb, "More 
foolish than Morychus," but 
c 161 J 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
then he connects this with the 
smearing of images of Bacchus, 
arguing that "Morychus" comes 
from the Greek verb meaning 
"to befoul," 20 
Moses, 61 
Muses, 11, 22, 38, 51, 105 
Negretos Hypnos, or Sound Sleep, at-
tendant of Folly, 13 
Neptune, 65, 67 
Nero, Nero Claudius Caesar Drusus 
Germanicus {37-68), Roman em-
peror, 115 
Nestor, oldest Grecian leader in the 
Trojan War, 18, 29, 41 
Nile, 89 
Niobe, wife of Amphion, king of 
Thebes, who was turned to stone 
by grief for the loss of her 
children, slain by Apollo and 
Diana, 90 
Nireus, beautiful, effeminate youth 
in Greek legend, mentioned by 
Homer, Iliad, II, 673, 29, 60 
NomiTUJlists, mediaeval philosoph-
ical opponents of the Realists, 79 
Numa, Pompilius Numa, successor 
to Romulus as ruler of early 
Rome, famed for good laws and 
institutions, 34 
Occamists, followers of William of 
Occam (died c. 1349), "the in-
vincible doctor," English scho-
lastic philosopher, 79, 82 
Odysseus, cf. also Ulysses, 47 
Old Comedy, about B.c. 465-400 in 
Greece, consisted chiefly of po-
litical and social satire directed 
at persons; Aristophanes belongs 
to the Old Comedy, though his 
later work is sometimes distin-
guished as belonging to the 
Middle Comedy, 2, 20 
Olympus, hill between Thessaly and 
Macedonia, fabled seat of jupiter 
and the other gods, 15, 67 
Orcus, the infernal world, per-
sonified as a god otherwise called 
Pluto, 11 
Origen, a Greek father of the 
church (185-253), of great learn-
ing, 114 
Orpheus, legendary Greek musician 
of Thrace, sometimes referred to 
as a poet; supposed to have been 
able, by playing on the lyre, to 
make trees move and rivers stop 
running; 
his 
musical 
power 
sometimes rationalized, as here, 
to mean eloquence, 34 
Ovid, 2 {note) 
Palemon, 
conceited 
grammarian 
(mentioned by Suetonius) who 
said learning would die with him, 
71 
Pallas, cf. also Minerva, 1, 12, 14, 
20, 21, 47, 84 
Pan, 8, 13, 21, 22 
Paris, abductor of Helen in Trojan 
story, 47 
Parisians, 61 
Paul {St.), 63, 79 (note), 81 {note), 
83, 84, 93, 99, 100 (note), 108 
{note), 109, 110 (note), 113 
{note), 114 (note), 115 {note), 
117 {note), 117 (note), 119 
Penelope, wife of Ulysses, who put 
off the importunities of her 
suitors during Ulysses' absence, 
by unweaving at night what she 
had woven in the day, 53, 82, 
96 {note) 
Persia, 72 
Persius, a learned Roman, con-
temporary with the satirist Lu-
cilius; also Aulus Persius Flaccus. 
a Roman satirist, but here prob-
ably the former, 73 
c 16i J 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
P, (St.), 63, 79, 80, 84, 99, 100 
(note) 
Pluuacians, people ofCorcyra (mod-
em Corfu), famed for their 
luxurious living, as represented 
in the Odyssey, VI-VIII, 96 
Phalaris, cruel tyrant of Agrigen-
tum, sixth century B.c., 9, 71 
Phaon, handsome young man of 
Lesbos, loved by many but es-
pecially by Sappho; his youth 
was renewed by Venus, 20, 29, 
42 
Pharisees, 115 (note) 
Philautia, or Self-Love, attendant of 
Folly, 13, 29, 30, 59, 61, 73 
Plwtbus, cf. also Apollo, 67 
Plato, favorite philosophical au-
thority of Folly; there is a tradi-
tion that he attempted a defence 
of Socrates at the latter's trial but 
was shouted down by the body of 
citizens acting as judges, 23 
(note), 31, 32 (note), 34, 39, 44, 
49 (note), 51 (note), 64, 75, 
108, 115, 119 (note), 120, 123 
(note) 
Platonists, 119 
Plautus (Titus Maccius), Roman 
writer of comedies (B.C. ?254-
184), 18 (note) 
Plutarch, late Greek biographer and 
moralist (?46-?120); see Archilo-
chus, Gryllus, the Spartan, 2 
P/1116, chief god of the underworld, 
65 
Plutus, god of riches, father of Folly, 
usually represented as blind; 
Aristophanes' comedy of this 
name represents him being re-
stored to sight, 1 1, 12 
Poma, goddess of punishment, 65 
Polyaates, 
Athenian rhetorician, 
author of a eulogy of Busirus; his 
name also suggested as a literary 
pseudonym, 2, 75 
Polypllemus, the Cyclops in the 
Odyssey, IX, and elsewhere; his 
"lyre-twanging" 
is 
borrowed 
from Aristophanes, Plutus, 290; 
see also Christopher, 22, 56 
Priapus, god among minor and local 
deities, sometimes represented 
as· son of Venus and Bacchus, 
with obscene attributes; the 
epithet jiculnus (fig-wood) which 
Erasmus always gives him means 
cheap and second-rate; trans-
lated here as "ramshackle," 
"shoddy," and "pinchbeck," 22, 
67,91 (note), 106 
Pro1114theus, one of the Titans, fabled 
to have formed men from clay 
and given them life and fire from 
heaven, 41 
Pythagoras, Greek philosopher (B.C. 
582-c.SOS); his "elemental tet-
rad" comes from one of the 
"golden verses" connected with 
his name: "the sacred tetrad 
which comprises the source and 
root of nature"; he taught that 
the numbers t, 2, 3, and 4, or 
the entities represented by them 
added to make 10, the perfection 
of being; another teaching was 
that souls successively entered 
various bodies--hence Lucian's 
account, The Dream, or the Cock, 
of Micyllus talking with a cock 
which claimed to be Pythagoras 
himself, 15,46 
Pythagoreans, followers of above; the 
early Pythagoreans held goods 
communistically, 69 
Quintilian (Marcus Fabius), Roman 
teacher of rhetoric (?35-?100), 
author of /nstitutiones Oratoriae, 
32 (note), 73 
Quintius Curtius, when a gap opened 
in the earth in the middle of the 
[ 168 J 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
Forum, the belief was spread 
abroad that only the body of a 
young nobleman could close it; 
Curtius mounted his horse and 
rode into it, to his death, 34 
Realists, proponents, in the Middle 
Ages, of Realism, which taught 
the reality of universals, opposing 
the Nominalists, 79 
Rhodes {island of), 67 
Romans, 21, 32, 34 {note), 61 
Roman See, 99 
Rome, 32, 61, 70 
Sagana, 91 (note) 
Sappho, poetess of Lesbos (fl. B.c. 
?600), 20 
Saracens, 82 
Saturn, father of Jupiter, Juno, and 
other gods, 11 
Saul, 117 {note) 
&ipios, the, famed Roman family; 
principally Scipio Africanus (ma-
jor) and Scipio Aemilius Af-
ricanus (minor), destroyer of 
Carthage, 75 
&otists, 
scholastic 
followers 
of 
Scotus, who were Erasmus's 
principal aversion among his 
contemporaries, 79, 81, 82 
&ots, 61 
&otus,Joannes Duns Scotus (?1265-
1308), 
"the subtle 
doctor," 
Scottish scholastic theologian, 
80, 82, 90, 105 
&ythian, Scythia, or Tartary, was 
classically thought of as desert 
and wilderness, 30 
Seiiu, horse of, Aulus Gellius (III, 
ix) tells of a clerk named Gnaeus 
Seius who owned a spirited horse 
which he sold to Dolabella, from 
whom it passed to Cassius and 
then to Mark Antony; it proved 
fatal or unlucky to each owner in 
turn, and the proverb arose, as 
Erasmus quotes it, 103 
Seneca (Lucius Annaeus), Roman 
playwright and Stoic moralist 
(B.C. ?4-A.D. 65), 2 {note), 39, 
60 (note), 115 
Sertorius, a noble Roman of c.lOO 
B.c., 34 (note) 
Seven Sages, or Seven Wise Men of 
Greece, a list made up of philos-
ophers of the sixth century B.c., 
including Solon, Bias, Thales, 
etc., 25 
Sibyl, 
Aeneas 
consulted 
the 
Cumaean sibyl, or prophetess, 
who said, among other things 
(Aeneid, VI, 135 ), et insano juvat 
indulgere labori, 51 
Silenus, minor deity, foster-father 
and 
pedagogue of Bacchus, 
represented as homely, squat, 
and drunken; see Alcibiades~. 22, 
36 
Sisyphus, robber of Attica, slain by 
Theseus, and condemned in Tar-
tarus to keep rolling a stone up a 
mountain, 76 
Socrates, 31, 33, 34, 51, 108 
Solon, wise lawgiver of Greece, 
sixth century B.c., 8, 83 
Sophists, in ancient Greece, popular 
teachers and speakers; later, in 
the period of the second Sophis-
tic, similar teachers, speakers, 
and writers in Rome and her 
possessions, first to third cen-
turies A.D., 8, 82 
Sophocles, Greek writer of tragedies 
(B.c. ?496-406), 16 (note) 
Sorbonne, college in Paris where 
Erasmus 
had 
encountered 
Scotism, 106 
Spaniards, 61 
Spartan, the (Lycurgus), 34 {note) 
Speculum 
Historiale, "Mirror of 
History," part of the Speculum 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
MaiiU of Vincent of Beauvais 
(1190-1264), giving the history 
of the world, and containing 
stories used as exempla by me-
diaeval preachers, 91 
StelmiU, a name suggested as a 
literary pseudonym; since it is 
not classical, Kan suggests that 
Erasmus meant to write Sthen-
elus, a name from Homer, men-
tioned by Horace, Odes, I, xv, 
24,75 
Stentor, Greek in the Trojan War, 
famed for his great voice, 76 
Stoics, "philosophers of the porch," 
or of the school of Zeno (B.C. 
340-265); Stoic thought became 
influential in Rome under the 
Republic and early Empire; 
singled out by Folly as her chief 
opponents, the Stoics taught con-
formity to nature, with a rational 
acceptance of the universe and of 
human destiny, but with no ex-
ercise of hope, fear, desire, regret, 
or other passions; the writings of 
Seneca were the principal means 
of transmitting Stoicism to the 
Renaissance and modem world; 
Cicero and Plutarch represented 
a modified Stoicism, 14, 15, 22, 
26, 39, 47, 51, 79 
Synesius (Cyrenensis), late Greek 
Neo-Platonic 
philosopher 
(c. 
370-430); his eulogy of baldness 
is extant, 2 
Tantalus, a king who, for insulting 
the gods, was condemned in the 
underworld to famish for tempt-
ing fruits always out of his reach, 
39 
Tarentum, city of Calabria, sacred to 
Neptune, 67 
TelemachiU, son of Ulysses; his name 
suggested as a literary pseu-
donym, 75, 105 
Tmedian lawyer, cf. next entry, 113 
Tmedos, island and city off the coast 
of Troas; a "Tenedian axe" was 
proverbially 
a 
synonym 
for 
quick, severe justice, 78 
Thales, Greek philosopher {c. B.c. 
640-546), one ofthe Seven Sages; 
used as a type of wisdom, 10 
Tkemistocles, Athenian general and 
statesman, 34 {note) 
Tktophrastus, Greek scientist and 
philosopher {died c. B.c. 287), 
who became head of the Peri-
patetic school founded by Aris-
totle; Folly's strictures upon his 
speaking seem to have no basis, 
as he was accounted a skilful 
speaker, 31 
Thersites, in the Iliad, a bad-natured 
and repulsive railer, 2, 29 
Thtuth, according to Socrates in 
Plato's Phaedrus, an Egyptian 
god that invented numbers, 
geometry, and letters; Ammon, 
the god who ruled as king at the 
time, refused to accept the in-
vention of letters on the ground 
that 
writing 
would 
impair 
people's memory, 43 
Thomas, St. Thomas Aquinas, "the 
angelic doctor" (?1225-?1274), 
most influential scholastic philos-
opher and systematizer; adapted 
Aristotle, 84 
Thomists, scholastic followers of 
above, 79 
Thracian, 30 
Thrasymachus, Athenian Sophist, 
interlocutor in Plato's Republic, 
whose name is suggested as a 
literary pseudonym, 75 
Timon, Athenian of the time of the 
Peloponnesian War, who con-
c 165 J 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
ceived a hatred of all people and 
went outside the city to live 
alone; subject of Lucian's Till 
Misanthrope, 33 
Timotheus, Athenian general, 103 
Timothy, 117 (note) 
Tithonus, mortal beloved by Au-
rora and by her made immortal; 
Folly neglects the circumstance, 
usually made much of, that he 
grew eternally older, though he 
could not die, 20 (note) 
Toulouse, town in France; Aulus 
Gellius (III, ix) tells that when 
Toulouse was pillaged by Quin-
tus Caepio and a quantity of 
gold was found in the temples, 
whoever touched a piece of the 
gold died a painful death, 103 
Trophonius, oracle and local deity 
in Greece; his oracular pro-
nouncements were given out in 
a cave where the ground was 
supposed.to have swallowed him, 
7 
T ryphl, or Wantonness, attendant 
of Folly, 13 
Turks, 3, 61, 82 
Ulysses, cf. also Odysseus, 2, 47 
Venetians, 61 
Venus,cf.alsoAphrodite, 15, 19,20, 
21, 51, 64, 65, 67 
Virgil, see also Sibyl, Aeneas, Mar-
pesian, 2 (note), 58 (note), 71 
Vulcan, blacksmith of the gods, born 
lame; the "net of Vulcan" is the 
one he fabricated to capture 
Mars and 
Venus 
(Vulcan's 
spouse); 21, 22, 78, 84 
Williamists, or Guilhelmists, friars 
of an order founded by William, 
Duke of Aquitaine, converted by 
St. Bernard, 87 
Xenocrates, philosopher, pupil of 
Plato along with Aristotle; that 
he committed suicide does not 
appear from accepted accounts, 
41 
routh, a nymph, mother of Folly, 12 
.(euxis, a Greek painter, ft. B.C. 430, 
64 
Zodiac, 89 

