THE PRIMACY OF SEMIOSIS:
AN ONTOLOGY OF RELATIONS

This page intentionally left blank 

PAUL BAINS
The Primacy of Semiosis
An Ontology of Relations
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS
Toronto Buffalo London

University of Toronto Press Incorporated 2006
Toronto Buffalo London
Printed in Canada
ISBN 10: 0-8020-9003-6
ISBN 13: 978-0-8020-9003-4
Printed on acid-free paper
Toronto Studies in Semiotics and Communication
Editors: Marcel Danesi, Umberto Eco, Paul Perron, Peter Schulz
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication
Bains, Paul
The primacy of semiosis : an ontology of relations / Paul Bains.
(Toronto studies in semiotics and communication)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 13: 978-0-8020-9003-4
ISBN 10: 0-8020-9003-6
1. Semiotics. 2. Ontology. I. Title. II. Series.
P99.B23 2006 
121'.68 
C2006-900496-X
University of Toronto Press acknowledges the financial assistance to its
publishing program of the Canada Council for the Arts and the Ontario
Arts Council.
University of Toronto Press acknowledges the financial support for its
publishing activities of the Government of Canada through the Book
Publishing Industry Development Program (BPIDP).
www.utppublishing.com 

This book is dedicated to
Lina, Dani, and Manu
for being there.

This page intentionally left blank 

Contents
PrefacGHVFH
i
x
Abbreviations 
xi
Introduction: The Drama of Relation and Its Characters 3
1 An Even Briefer History of Relations 
15
Terminology 18
Discussion in and after the Latin West 19
2 Deleuze and External (or Ontological) Relations 25
The Circle of the Proposition 30
The Complex Theme of the Proposition 32
3 Poinsot and Deely on Relations and Signs 39
Objective Being 42
The Doctrine of 'Species' 45
Ideas 46
Formal Signs 49
Scotist and Thomist Accounts 51
Objective Being as Umwelt 57
4 Umwelten 59
Jakob von Uexkiill and Umwelten 59
The Tick as an Interpreter - the Functional Cycle 62
Deleuze and Guattari's Appropriation 64
Contemporary Value and Semiotic Use 66

viii Contents
Species-Specific Objective Worlds 74
Heideggerean Umwelten 78
The Transformation of Umwelt into Lebenswelt 83
5 Autopoiesis and Languaging 85
Background and Context 85
Cognitive Systems 92
Living Systems 95
Languaging 103
Conclusion 
133
Notes 
145
Bibliography 
167
Index 
177

Preface
The Primacy of Semiosis is concerned with the ontology of relations and
semiosis (the action of signs). The book focuses on the claim that rela-
tions are 'external' to their terms and seeks to give an ontological
account of this purported externality of relations. The argument is that
an understanding of the ontology of relations allows for a compelling
account of the action of signs, that is, how things come to stand for
something other than themselves.
In this book, I develop the creative proposition, first made by John
Poinsot (aka John of St Thomas) in 1632, that ontologically, signs are
relations (whose whole being is in 'being-toward' - esse ad). Further-
more, relations are univocal in their being as relations. This univocity of
being is antecedent to the division between ens rationis and ens reale.
Thus the ontology of relations presented here is neither mind-depen-
dent nor mind-independent insofar as the rationale of the relation is
concerned.
Three principal theorists are invoked in this account: Gilles Deleuze,
John Poinsot, and John Deely argue that there is a compatibility and
mutual enrichment between Deleuze's account of relations and the rela-
tively unknown semiotic of the late-Latin scholastic John Poinsot (as
translated and interpreted by the contemporary post-Peircian semioti-
cian,John Deely).
To further illuminate this material and the relevance of an ontology
of relations for cognition and theories of language, I give an account of
the ethologist Jakob von Uexkull's Umwelt sign theory and of the biolo-
gist Humberto Maturana's autopoietic theory of 'languaging.'
In engaging with this subject matter, the book presents a semiotic that
subverts the opposition between realism and idealism. In other words, it

x 
Preface
presents a semiotic that is as real as it is ideal, that is, a semiotic in which
what have been called 'nature' and 'culture' interpenetrate (a la Bruno
Latour) in an expanding collective of humans and non-humans.
In conclusion, in addition to emphasizing the ethico-political implica-
tions of this ontology of relations, the book makes suggestions for inter-
disciplinary research that would complement and further develop this
work.

Abbreviations
ATP 
Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari. A Thousand Plateaus: Capital-
ism and Schizophrenia, trans. Brian Massumi. London: Athlone
Press, 1984.
D 
Gilles Deleuze and Claire Parnet, Dialogues, trans. Hugh Tomlin-
son and Barbara Habberjam. New York: Columbia University
Press, 1987.
DR 
Gilles Deleuze. Difference and Repetition, trans. Paul Patton. Lon-
don: Athlone Press, 1994.
FCM 
Martin Heidegger. The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics: World,
Finitude, Solitude. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1995.
GL 
Keith Ansell Pearson. Germinal Life: The Difference and Repetition of
Deleuze. London: Routledge, 1999.
LS 
Gilles Deleuze. The Logic of Sense, trans. Mark Lester with Charles
Stivale, ed. Constantin V. Boundas, New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press, 1990.
NB 
John Deely. New Beginnings: Early Modern Philosophy and Postmod-
ern Thought. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1994.
TDS 
John Poinsot. Tractatus de Signis, arranged in bilingual format by
John Deely in consultation with Ralph A. Powell. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1985.
WIP 
Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari. What Is Philosophy ? trans. Gra-
ham Burchell and Hugh Tomlinson. London: Verso, 1994.

This page intentionally left blank 

THE PRIMACY OF SEMIOSIS:
AN ONTOLOGY OF RELATIONS

This page intentionally left blank 

Introduction: The Drama of Relation
and Its Characters
Inter-esse - To be between - To be interesting
Relations are in the middle and exist as such.
Deleuze (1987, 55)
How what one does interests others, how it 'counts' for others, is not opposed
to, but rather an element in the way one becomes interested in what one does.
Who is interested, how can one interest others, at what price and according to
what methods and constraints? These are not secondary questions relating to
the 'diffusion' of knowledge. They are ingredients of its identity, of the manner
whereby it exists for others and situates them.
Stengers (1996, 48-9; my translation)
This work is about the being and dynamic becoming of relations and
that which is relative - in particular, the relations among things, objects
of thought, and signs. It is an exploration into the ontological principle
of the univocity of being and non-being, that is, a hunt for the single
voice that raises the clamour of being (Gille Deleuze's quest inGFGHFC
and Repetition); for a fundamental onto-logic or, rather, semiotic, that
should, as Heidegger notes in his introduction to Being and Time, pay
heed to Aristotle's problem of the unity of Being as over against the mul-
tiplicity of categories applicable to things. We are going to get positively
medieval and attempt to achieve the clarity that Heidegger claims the
Thomist and Scotist schools never had.
Why write about the being of relation? I will take the risk of claiming
that the concept of relation is like a skeleton or abstract key that allows

4 The Primacy of Semiosis
us to move from Duns Scotus to John Poinsot, to Charles Sanders
Peirce, to Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Immanuel Kant, Humberto
Maturana, Martin Heidegger, John Deely, Alfred North Whitehead,
Bruno Latour, and Isabelle Stengers (to mention a few members of the
cast). All these thinkers are in one way or another concerned with rela-
tions and their being. Their understanding of the being of relation will
determine the structure of their thought and the extent to which it is
able to short-circuit the realist/idealist oscillation in Western philoso-
phy; to provide the ontological foundations in relation both for a mini-
mal correspondence between thought and things and for its more
complex reformulation in terms of a collective of humans and non-
humans involved in a double individuation, a conjoined genesis of sub-
ject and object - in other words, what Deleuze and Guattari call the
'truth of the relative' rather than 'the relativity of truth' (1994, 130).
The inherent subjectivism of some modern and much postmodern
thought (in its assumption that language and thought can have no rela-
tion to anything other than their own products) has yet to wake up to
this possibility. What will thus be envisioned is what postmodernism
might turn out to be (using John Deely's Latin construction in the sub-
junctive mood - Quid sit postmodernismus?)1 if not a circular, or more
complex, dead end.
This focus on the being of relations was not the target of my original
research. Initially I was exploring the kind of vitalist ontology that can
be found in Deleuze and Guattari's work, together with some of their
sources of influence, in particular the work of the philosopher and 'psy-
chobiologist' Raymond Ruyer. However, the more I read and thought
about their work and its conceptual geography or 'ecology of ideas,' the
more I became persuaded that the question of the ontology of relations
was crucial to understanding the dynamics of their thought; more gen-
erally, this question also provided an astoundingly fruitful way of
approaching the history of philosophy - all the more so when one
becomes aware that the possibility of external relations has been largely
denied in modern thought from Ockam to Kant, with the notable
exceptions of John Poinsot (on whom more later), William James, Ber-
trand Russell (in his work on external relations), and Deleuze and
Guattari, whose philosophy is always concerned with relations (or inter-
being) in one way or another. Interbeing: the 'hallucination point of
thought,' as Deleuze puts it, that is repugnant to thought yet which
thought must be forced to think.
So this work is concerned with the being of external relations - and

Introduction 5
for a particular reason. I will argue (a la Poinsot and Deely) that without
an understanding of what external relations do, it is impossible to have a
coherent account of the action of signs (semiosis); furthermore, without
this understanding we cannot know how we communicate, nor can we
understand the being of our experience - how we become with the
world. This book will constantly emphasize the semiotic realization that
'ideas' or 'concepts' are signs, provenating relations that produce
awareness of something other than themselves, rather than being the
direct objects of our awareness (as assumed in the inherently subjectiv-
ist, classical modern philosophy of, for example, Descartes and Locke) .2
As I have mentioned, this concern with relations emerged slowly dur-
ing my research period and in a sense forced itself upon me. I was not
looking for it. In retrospect, what happened was that while I sought ways
to organize my research materials - that is, to relate them and find a
plot - it became more and more apparent that the being of relations
and what they do was the main story that had to be told.
What came as a surprise was that this story seemed to be taking me
away from the almost standard approach to semiotics (the study of the
action of signs) that was being presented in the contemporary academy.
It became apparent that the works of Peirce and his major historical pre-
decessor, Poinsot (1589-1644), were relevant to an understanding of
what Deleuze and Guattari were doing in their work and that there was
little material on Deleuze and Guattari that seriously engaged with rela-
tions. This is not to say that there was no material that affirmed the
importance of external relations for Deleuze; just that this material
never really clarified what external relations were in their proper
being.3 For that matter, neither do Deleuze and Guattari really elabo-
rate on this 'logic of relations.'
A word of warning. I make no claims to absolute mastery of the materi-
als engaged with in the pages that follow. I present here a tentative
exploration of a logic and critique that I had been largely unacquainted
with and that woke me up from a certain undogmatic confusion. I will
indicate where I feel that further research would be valuable - research
that time constraints or my personal capacities did not allow. No doubt
the reader will find many other questions that should be ignored or,
perchance, pursued.
One of the factors that drove me to look more closely at the status of
relations and semiosis in Deleuze and Guattari's work is the following:
Deleuze's constant emphasis on external relations, which he says he
unearthed in the work of Hume and which he regards as Hume's great

6 The Primacy of Semiosis
discovery. This is surely one of the best examples of Deleuze mounting
on the back of another philosopher and producing an immaculate con-
ception. The following extract from Deleuze (1995, 5-6) gives some
insight into this process and to many of the themes of this book:
I belong to a generation, one of the last generations, that was more or less
bludgeoned to death with the history of philosophy. History of philosophy
plays a patently repressive role in philosophy; it's philosophy's own version
of the Oedipus complex. 'You can't seriously consider saying what you
yourself think until you've read this and that, and that on this, and this on
that.' Many members of my generation never broke free of this; others did,
by inventing their own particular methods and new rules, a new approach.
I myself 'did' history of philosophy for a long time, read books on this or
that author. But I compensated in various ways: by concentrating, in the
first place, on authors who challenged the rationalist tradition in this his-
tory (and I see a secret link between Lucretius, Hume, Spinoza, and
Nietzsche, constitued by their critique of negativity, their cultivation of joy,
the hatred of interiority, the externality offerees and relations, the denun-
ciation of power ... and so on) [...] But I suppose the main way I coped with
it at that time was to see the history of philosophy as a kind of buggery, or
(it comes to the same thing), immaculate conception. I saw myself as tak-
ing an author from behind and giving him a child that would be his own
offspring, yet monstrous.
I have not been bludgeoned to death by the history of philosophy. In
fact, one of my main introductions to philosophy was Deleuze and
Guattari's A Thousand Plateaus. But during my time in the contemporary
academy (primarily in Australia), I could not help but notice a certain
detour of thought that has occurred through the dissemination of
something called 'postmodern theory.' This 'theory' often appears igno-
rant of Peirce, and would certainly know little or nothing of the semiotic
of Poinsot's Tractatus de Signis (1632),4 which, as Deely puts it in his 'Edi-
torial Afterword' to the first bilingual edition, 'is nothing less than a
judicious assessment of the philosophical and theological thought of
the Latin West, taken in its historical totality as synthesizing influences
of ancient Greece, Rome, Byzantium (Constantinople), and Islam.'
For the present I simply note that Deleuze's 'hatred of interiority' and
his development or 'buggery'5 of the Stoic incorporeals into an abstract
semiotic machine of language would have found an unexpected ally in

Introduction 7
Poinsot - and that Guattari, in his final work, Chaosmosis (1995, 30),
would have found in Poinsot one of the greatest theorists of the 'incor-
poreal and virtual part of assemblages of enunciation,' which traditional
scholastic realism - and, of course, certainly not nominalism (the 'mod-
ern' way of William of Ockham) - could truly grasp.
Other theorists who will emerge during this study include the etholo-
gist Jakob von Uexkiill, with particular reference to his concept of
Umwelten (species-specific worlds), which provides a fine way of appreci-
ating how experiential worlds are constructed that are neither objective
nor subjective in terms of the traditional modern dichotomy, but that
operate with a trichotomy or triadic relation involving the organism
experiencing, the object experienced, and the basis on which the object
exists as experienced - namely, the sign relation. The relation in which
the sign consists is the refrain of this book.
In order to articulate the being proper to this relation, we will start, in
chapter 1, with a short history of the concept of relation, using Julius R.
Weinberg and Deely as our principal guides. Weinberg's essay 'The Con-
cept of Relation' (1965) is one of the rare works that thematically con-
siders this question.
This will allow us to re-enter the Umwelt of Deleuze and Guattari with
a greater appreciation of what they are doing in developing an event-
centred ontology based on the univocity of being that transcends the
distinction between 'mind-dependent being,' or ens rationis, and mind-
independent being, or ens reale, rather than an ontology focused prima-
rily on ens reale or mind-independent being (such as Aristotelian sub-
stance) , or an epistemology based on ens rationis (Kant). This will allow
us also to see how other theorists, such as Humberto Maturana and
Francisco Varela, deal with the question of relation and semiosis and the
extent to which they succeed in extricating their analyses from idealism
or realism.
Thus a search for a univocal logic of relations indifferent to being 'in
voce' or 'in re' and prior to this distinction: Tf Being is the unique event
in which all events communicate with one another, univocity refers both
to what occurs and to what is said ... Univocal Being inheres in language
and happens to things; it measures the internal relation of language
with the external relation of Being. Neither active nor passive, univocal
Being is neutral. It is extra-Being, that is, the minimum of Being common
to the real, the possible, and the impossible' (Deleuze 1990, 180).
By concentrating on a largely ignored ontology of relations we will
become acquainted with a semiotic that is irreducible to a realism (in

8 The Primacy of Semiosis
which 'reality' is an external 'given' untainted by observation), an ideal-
ism (in which 'reality' is a consequence of mental acts), or even a Kan-
tianism (in which what the mind knows is more its own workings than
exteriority): 'It is something much richer than either reduction, some-
thing more collusive even than the rapport between fly trap and fly in
the realm of insects and flowers. It is, in a phrase, semiotic reality, the
true reality of human experience, wherein the line between what is
dependent upon and what is independent of interpretive activity can
never be finally drawn, because that very line itself shifts with each new
achievement of understanding whether "speculative" or "practical"'
(Deelyl988b, 72).
This is more than interesting, because it inexorably leads us to an
image of thought that is not restricted to the representation, correspon-
dence, or adequation of a pregiven known to a pregiven knower, but
that consists rather in the reciprocal production and specification, or
'double individuation' of the knower and the known. Ultimately, this
involves an ontological or semiotic relation in place of a purely episte-
mological one.
But what were the steps to this new image of thought, which in hind-
sight appears so obvious? There is no problem of knowledge if we are not
'inside,' isolated behind a screen of representations, and the world is
not 'outside' and intrinsically unknowable as a matter of'principle.6
As already mentioned, the question of relations forced itself upon me
as a problem that mutated into the focus of my research; it was not sim-
ply a question of how to organize and relate together a variety of materi-
als. Deleuze's constant insistence on the 'exteriority' of relations to their
terms as essential for any pluralistic philosophy that affirms the possibil-
ity of constructing novel relations not derived from the 'essence' of
things, seemed worthy of thought. For Deleuze, James, and Russell
(among others), Hegel's thought assumes that there must be an abso-
lute, self-enclosed system with no loose ends, wherein everything is
internally related in a single, all-inclusive whole - that is, like a pool of
treacle, as opposed to an irregular mosaic without a bedding but with
relations that are distinct from the relative pieces. Neither a One nor a
Many, but rather a 'fusional' Multiplicity for which a logic of relations
irreducible to their terms (although existentially inseparable from
them) is required. The trick is to realize that 'things' cannot be under-
stood apart from their relations, or assemblages, but that this does not
require one great big only-internally-related blob. We do not have to
choose between complete disunion and complete union.
My hope is that some novel relations will be constructed throughout

Introduction 9
this reflection and engagement with relations. Michel Serres, who saw
his work as a 'general theory of relations,' notes that 'relations are, in
fact, ways of moving from place to place, or of wandering' (Serres and
Latour 1995, 103). I am glad to have wandered with relations. They
always took me somewhere unexpected in an open multiplicity that
could not be totalized by any addition, and in which subtraction always
left a remainder.
This particular trip or stroll went the following way, although it always
overtook and surprised the non-punctiform 'me' and made the multi-
plicity that I am become something else again, in the laying down of a
path through walking it:
Following Deleuze's hatred of inferiority and his suggestion that rela-
tions be made 'the hallucination point of thought,' it seemed necessary
to look more closely at the ontological status of relations. It 'occurred'
to me (or it happened to me) that Deely's detour by way of John Poin-
sot's Tractatus de Signis, and the ontology of relations contained therein,
provided a fascinating complement to Deleuze's univocal ontology,
which had been inspired, in part, by Duns Scotus and Avicenna.
Poinsot's genius lay in moving from a theory of relations (in which all
of reality is composed of two kinds of relative beings: [1] individuals,
who are relative - i.e., who cannot be understood apart from their rela-
tions, and [2] their actual external or ontological relations - e.g., the
eye, which cannot be understood apart from its relation to light) towards
a semiotic in which concepts (as signs) are relations that bring into
awareness something other than themselves. Furthermore - and this is
perhaps the crucial insight - ontological relations are univocal in their
being. They are indifferent, or superordinate, to the division of being
into ens reale and ens rationis. A relation is a relation whether it is
assumed to exist extramentally or intramentally. Its foundations or con-
ditions are external to the relation itself, and it is this uniqueness of the
ontological status of relations that allows them to 'pass' freely between
'mind' and 'matter.' Relations do not respect any ontological Iron Cur-
tain. This is what allows for a 'realistic realism' (a la Latour), or for a
compenetration in experience between mind and nature that knows no
final boundary (a la Deely); it also allows for a semiotic reality or collec-
tive in a process of becoming that is generative of relations. In fact, as
Deely emphasizes, Poinsot's ontological analysis of signs as relations
only develops its full power when there is included within it a post-Peir-
cian analysis of how signs become, or grow, and how they can do this with-
out the need for physically existent terms.
The difficulty of engaging with Poinsot is that he walks a tightrope

10 The Primacy of Semiosis
between Scotism and Thomism (something that, perhaps for economy
of presentation or didactic clarity, Deely tends to gloss over). Poinsot
allows for representation (esse repraesentatum), but cognition does not
terminate in a representation or first become aware of the representa-
tion as an instrumental sign. The representation is treated as a formal
sign (ontological relation) that disappears before its object, and an
object is anything to the extent that it is a terminus of a relation of feel-
ing or cognition. Things are first of all objects, but this does not stop the
objects of awareness from also being things that exist independently of
the awareness in which they are partially objects as well. Representations
found a relation to something other than themselves, and when that
object is physically existent the relation is also a physical relation allow-
ing for knowledge of something not simply contained within an intra-
mental sphere. A knowledge of an extra- (or pre-) mental world is
possible, because the ontological relation is indifferent to what is and
what is not independent of thought. None of this precludes an aware-
ness of objects that have no physical existence.
Without daring to give a 'scholastic' account,8 and restricting our-
selves to the notion of objective being, we can say that Duns Scotus cer-
tainly diverges from classical Thomism in developing the notion of
objective being (esse objectivum) as entitatively immanent to the knower.
Scotus identifies the notion of concept (i.e., that which is known) with objective
being, which is constituted in and by the intellect. It is an 'intelligible'
representative imitation, or a resemblance that corresponds in me to
something outside of me.
Poinsot attempts in an original way to avoid the concept of entitative
immanence by developing an account of the concept (expressed species
or 'specifying form') as a formal sign. All of these perhaps unfamiliar
terms will be explained later in the text. Although Poinsot retains objec-
tive being, it is not entitatively immanent but suprasubjective (like the
Umwelf). It is not the concept, as formal sign, that is known, but rather
objective being as a pattern of univocal relations, some of which may
also at the same time be physical relations. In this sense, objective being
is not representative. It is not a middle term that is known first and then
on the basis of which something else might be known. It is a pure 'non-
mediating' relation - it does not get in the way. Thus, Poinsot seeks to
retain a certain Thomistic realism, while at the same time, and perhaps
in spite of himself, he opens the way for a semiotic in which concepts
are formal signs that bring into awareness something other than them-
selves - but these 'objects' need not have extramental, physical exist-
ence, or they may mix up physical and ideal being.

Introduction 11
As Deely notes (1998, 233), a knowledge of 'essences' is not 'a special
intuition, or immediate insight into what things are "beyond their sensi-
ble appearances." On the contrary, a "grasp of an essence" normally
consists in those very sensible appearances themselves subsumed under
the pattern of a set of relations abstractly taken apart from the instances,
and supposed to consider the unique character of some object, whether
real or fictional.' Or as Deleuze and Guattari would say: 'The concept
speaks the event, not the essence or the thing' (WIP, 21). Thus, the bird
as an event or pattern of relations - colours, postures, songs.
Through a study of the concept of Umwelten as species-specific objective
worlds, all these ontological and semiotic issues become more concrete.
The Umweltis rescued from Jacob von Uexkull's overly subjectivist (Kan-
tian) interpretation and becomes no longer a subjective bubble, but
rather a limitless interface through which ontological or 'pure' relations
and 'becomings' easily 'pass.' This does not mean that relations now
move from a closed, monadic subjectivity to an extramental world. Sub-
jectivity is constitutively open, or has a being-toward, as do all relative
beings. Umwelten are suprasubjective. All of this amounts to a semiotic
wherein (as Guattari emphasized in his final work, Chaosmosis [1995,
22]) the interpretant of the Peircian triad is foregrounded as the active
mediator between the physical universe of things and the objective uni-
verse that includes things but is not reducible to them. This is an
expanded conception of subjectivity that includes not only words and
images but all the 'machinations' that go to make up those words and
images. We are semiotic, existential terrritories rather than brains in
vats, and these territories or ecologies are not contained within our
physical anatomy, nor are they known only as immanent representa-
tions. The question becomes this: Where does your cognition or subjec-
tivity terminate if it is a suprasubjective process and not a stable
substance? The 'self becomes a sign relation or interpretant rather than
an unrelated, ontological entity.
What is being constantly emphasized is a kind of semiotic ontology in
which relations become crucial at every level of analysis and allow for
the interweaving of corporeal and incorporeal factors. Relations are an
intrinsic dimension of being, and every being becomes the active centre
of a web of relations with other beings. The relations are, however, in
what they are as relations, suprasubjective. They are not reducible to the
relative being that enters into or generates these relations. A dilemma of
much thought is the difficulty of thinking beyond the One or the Many
and entertaining the concept of a multiplicity of different things or
beings that are nevertheless in mobile relationships - the concept of a

12 The Primacy of Semiosis
place where, sometimes with the greatest difficulty,JJKKKJKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKJH
constructed. As Guattari so often emphasized, this amounts to an
'ethico-aesthetic paradigm' in which one takes responsibility for the
relations and existential territories, or worlds, that one seeks to con-
struct with others (whether human or non-human).
Autopoietic theory provides an interesting contemporary version of
Umwelt theory; and if one ignores many of Maturana's idealistic state-
ments, which make cognition a closed bubble (a la von Uexkull), it can
offer valuable distinctions - in particular, the distinction between an
organism and its relational domain, or domain of interactions. Thus,
'behaviour' is a relation between a living system and its medium, and
therefore behaviour does not take place in the anatomo-physiological
domain of the organism. The analysis of language as a relational activity,
and the claim that objects and consciousness arise in languaging, are
also compatible with many aspects of the semiotic approach with which
we have engaged.
The problem is always the 'radical' constructivism that Maturana
espouses, in which there can never be an aspectual coincidence or corn-
penetration between objects of awareness and things of a prejacent envi-
ronment. Maturana thinks that we live in a bubble of cognition and that
we can say nothing about the 'substratum that we need for epistemolog-
ical reasons.' Varela has certainly distanced himself from this approach,
and seeks to develop a 'naturalized phenomenology' or enactive
approach that has definite affinities with Guattari's work. In fact,
Guattari refers to the work of Maturana and Varela in Chaosmosis, argu-
ing that the concept of autopoiesis deserves to be rethought. Isabelle
Stengers makes similar claims in Cosmopolitiques (1996), arguing that we
should be wary of Maturana's general epistemology. To be fair to Mat-
urana, he will argue that they have misunderstood him and not appreci-
ated the distinction he makes between the autopoietic system and its
domain of relations. To be fair to Maturana's critics, these distinctions
are often made in seminars or articles that are not easily available. In
any case, it is significant that Guattari sought to make use of an enlarged
concept of autopoiesis and certainly entered into dialogue with Varela.
One of the main points of intersection in their work is the notion of
'enaction,' or reciprocal specification between knower and known,
rather than adequate representation of a pregiven world wherein knowl-
edge becomes ontological and truth becomes production - and all the
more real for that. Here, perhaps, there is a tension with Deely's early
attachment to the language of truth as adequation - a term he uses to

Introduction 
13
assert the interpenetration of the physical and ideal, or physis and nous.
However, Deely's work, taken as a whole in its processual dimension,
seems to be compatible with the semiotic and ontologic of Deleuze and
Guattari, and vice versa. This is not to suggest that they say the same
things (which would not be very interesting), but rather that there is a
compatibility between them - particularly at an ethico-political level
where we take responsibility for the collective worlds or Umwelts/Leb-
enswelten, be they corporeal or incorporeal, that we co-construct with oth-
ers (be they human or otherwise) in the micro- and macro-politics of
everyday existence. What world do we want to invent and make exist col-
lectively? Guattari (1995, 83) tells us: 'I is an other, a multiplicity of oth-
ers, embodied at the intersection of partial components of enunciation,
breaching on all sides individuated identity and the organized body.
The cursor of chaosmosis never stops oscillating between these diverse
enunciative nuclei - not in order to totalize them, synthesize them in a
transcendent self, but in spite of everthing, to make a world of them.'
I will take the risk of claiming that the following pages constitute fal-
tering steps towards a novel relational corpus of knowledges and prac-
tices that need to be developed collectively by a community of inquirers.
Philosophy requires invention in order to stay alive, and if these kinds of
less familiar materials are not engaged with, philosophy risks becoming
solely 'history of philosophy,' taught by apparently subtle connoisseurs
of particular doctrines, when in fact philosophy can be (and sometimes
is) a creative and experimental metaphysical activity enriching the life
of a collective of humans and non-humans.

This page intentionally left blank 

1 An Even Briefer History of Relations
It will be readily admitted that the concept of relation ... is fundamental to mod-
ern science, logic, and philosophy. There is no doubt, also, that the need for this
concept has been felt throughout the history of civilization since the time of the
Greeks. It is not, however, so readily admitted or much realized that many
aspects of ancient, medieval, and early modern philosophy prevented a clear
understanding of this concept.
Weinberg (1965, 61)
Relations are in the middle and exist as such. This exteriority of relations is not
a principle, it is a vital protest against principles. Indeed if one sees in it some-
thing which runs through life, but which is repugnant to thought, then thought
must be forced to think it, one must make relations the hallucination point of
thought.
Deleuze and Parnet (1987, 55)
This chapter is not intended (assuming this were possible) to give any-
thing like a complete philosophical history of relations. Its purpose is to
provide a brief account of the 'classical' theory of relations insofar as it
is relevant to this book.1
As Weinberg (1965, 68) notes, Aristotle's views on the subject of rela-
tions have affected 'almost everything that has been said on the subject
for the past two thousand years.' So we will start with Aristotle, particu-
larly as this affords us a manner of entry into the central concerns of
Poinsot's Tractatus de Signis.
Aristotle is interested in the really real - that is, the way things are
independently of the mind - extra-animam. He uses the term 'substance'

16 The Primacy of Semiosis
for the purported individual things or fundamental natural units that
are assumed to have independent existence - for example, 'Socrates
and this ox here.' The problem with this way of approaching things is
that relations between individual substances become metaphysical nui-
sances. (Whitehead develops his philosophy of organism through a sus-
tained critique of this concept of substance, which he replaces with
'events' in relation as the ultimate units of natural occurrence. Deleuze
and Guattari also propose an event-centred ontology, with due refer-
ence to Whitehead.) What we need is a philosophy of the event that
ousts the verb 'to be' and its attributes.
Aristotle thought that these ultimate substances had a basic enduring
self-identity that could be affected by a number of 'accidents' or man-
ners of being - for example, quantity, quality, position, when, where,
relation - that were dependent on substance. Thus the affections were
accidental in character. This is the Aristotilean categorial schema. A sub-
stance as such must be changeless and any changes can only be in other
features (accidents) which are not essential to the underlying ' changelessness of
the entity or substance. Whitehead and Deleuze and Guattari's ontology
(or schizoscholasticism) is largely based on abandoning the notion of
an unchanging subject of change (a subject and its attributes or predi-
cates) for situations in which entities become individuated and exist
through intrinsic processes of change or becoming wherein each entity
or existential territory cannot be understood apart from its relations
with others.
What we need to be clear about for our present purposes is what may
turn out to be the peculiar notion of relation in the Aristotelian catego-
ries ... and the fact that, as Weinberg (1965, 63) notes, very few philoso-
phers seem to have realized why 'relations cannot really be fitted into a
substance-accident ontology.' Remember that for Kant, categories were
things of the mind, or mental entities - the subjective forms of under-
standing - whereas for Aristotle the mind did not impose its own rela-
tions on the sensory manifold. Aristotle, in 'realist' mode, claimed to
have discovered pre-existing relations existing independently of human
thought. Kant, as the quintessential classical modern philosopher,
claimed that relations are the product of the mind's own constructions,
since the mind can know nothing of an order of being that would not be
changed by being known. Kant's categories only apply to appearances, or
phenomena, never to a mind-independent order of being. As might
become mind-blowingly evident, neither of these alternatives is ade-
quate in accounting for our experience or for describing how semiosis
(the action of signs) actually works.

An Even Briefer History of Relations 17
As we have noted, in the Aristotelian schema all the categories of
being, other than primary substance, are dependent and accidental.
What is significant is that Aristotle included a category of 'the relative'
as one of the 'accidents' of being, but he became concerned by some
strange properties that relations seem to possess. In the Categories, Aris-
totle makes two attempts to categorize the relative. The first of these is
as follows: 'Those things are called relative which, being either said to
be of something else or related to something else, are explained by refer-
ence to that other thing.'2 Now Aristotle recognizes that this definition
contains some ambiguity as to whether relation constitutes a distinct cat-
egory of being within the substance-accident scheme, and decides that
he has to modify it:
Indeed, if our definition of that which is relative was complete, it is very dif-
ficult, if not impossible, to prove that no substance is relative. If, however,
our definition was not complete, if those things are only properly called
relative in the case of which relation to an external object is a necessary
condition of existence, perhaps some explanation of the dilemma may be
found.
The former definition does indeed apply to all relatives, but the fact that
a thing is explained with reference to something else does not make it essen-
tially relative.3
As Deely (1974, 867) notes astutely: 'This distinction between what
must be explainedby reference to something without having itself to be a
relation, and what is essentially a reference to something other than that
on which it is founded or based, is the first recorded glimpse of what was
to become the Latin distinction within the order of relation between
what is relative secundum did [according to the way it must be expressed
in discourse] and what is relative secundum esse [according to the way it
has being].' Articulating this distinction and showing how it is relevant
to semiosis and to an order of being - the ontological status of the being
of relation - that is neither substantial nor accidental, neither subjective
nor objective, but rather preceding any categorial schema, is what this
story is about. That is, the being o/the middle, distinct from the terms of
the relation; the exteriority of relations to their terms; or an event of
interbeing.
We have now reached a threshold. This distinction between relatio
secundum did andKLLKLLLKLLLJHJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJJDJFJGFJJJFF
medieval period by the Christian commentators (at least from the time
of Boethius' commentary on the Aristotelian Categories in the sixth cen-

18 The Primacy of Semiosis
tury), but, as Deely (1974, 869) notes: 'To disengage as such the full
notion of ontological relation ("relatio secundum esse") in its properly
philosophical import, it seems, was the unique privilege of Poinsot
among all the Latin scholastics who, for more than 1100 years, debated
the question of the relative raised by Aristotelian texts.'
The difficulty in grasping this distinction between relative terms and
the relations themselves is twofold. First, apart from Poinsot's TDS (first
published in 1632), its proper thematic articulation has almost totally
disappeared from our conceptual landscape since the time of William of
Ockham and the rise of nominalism around 1350, which denied an
ontological status to relations independent of their terms. Second, Aris-
totle used the expression to pros ti to refer not only to relations them-
selves, but also to the things that have relations.
This contributed to the only slowly dawning (and soon to fade) aware-
ness that every 'thing,' or term, is 'relative' in two different ways: first, it
can only be understood with reference to other things (relatio secundum
did);L;;;L;;;;KLKKLLLLLLKKKKKKKKKLKKKLLLLLKKKKKKKKKLLHJJJJJKIIKKJHHJKKK
actually involved in (relatio secundum esse). Subtle perhaps, but the grow-
ing awareness of this distinction provides us (as Deely repeatedly
emphasizes) with a powerful tool for rereading the history of philoso-
phy and, ultimately, for inventing what a 'postmodern' philosophy
could be once divested of its latent semiological idealism: a metaphysi-
cal materialism of the event that combines the physical and mental, the
mind-dependent and mind-independent.
But first we need to develop a terminological consistency.
Terminology
1. Relatio secundum did (relation according to the way it must be
expressed in discourse) Following Deely's translation of this term in
Poinsot's TDS, relatio secundum did will be rendered as 'transcendental
relation.' Poinsot equates transcendental relation with the older termi-
nology of relatio secundum did, and this provides us with an English term
(which, of course, still needs to be conceptually developed).
The medieval notion of transcendental came to be used (after the thir-
teenth century) to refer to those properties of being which appear to
transcend the Aristotelian categories of being.4 They surpass or run
through all of them. This, of course, was Aristotle's worry in his categori-
zation of the relative. Nothing can be understood or explained without
at least implicit reference to something other than itself, and thus all of

An Even Briefer History of Relations 
19
his categories seemed to be 'relative.' But to be relative is not actually to
be a relation.
2. Relatio secundum esse (relation according to the way it has being)
Again following Deely's translation of TDS, relatio secundum esse will be
rendered as 'ontological relation.' As Deely explains in his editorial
afterword to Poinsot's TDS (page 463), this provides, 'faute de mieux,' a
less cumbersome term. More important - in fact, crucially important for
this story - ontological relation does all the work that the more recent
term 'external relation' achieves.
Discussion in and after the Latin West
The crux in discussions of the relative in the Latin West prior to Poinsot
was whether there was a mind-independent category of ontological rela-
tion - that is, a relation whose whole manner of being was essentially
toward another. Or was relation all in the mind, there being no real
'interbeing,' or communion, or intersubjectivity, among individual exis-
tents or subjects? To be able to really be a relation, although existentially
dependent on some relative foundation, or to only be something that is rela-
tive to other things, but without there actually being a relation 'external'
to its terms: that was the question.
By the thirteenth century the general consensus among those who
had the time and the interest to consider this question was that there
are indeed relations existentially inseparable but analytically distinct
from their foundations, in relative things (e.g., fatherhood, or the
equality of atomic weight between two atoms that cannot be identified
with the weight of each of them); but with William of Ockham this con-
sensus gives way to a nominalism,5 in which there are no mind-indepen-
dent relations distinct from their terms. Ockham accepts order and
unity in the universe, objective similarity, causal connection; but he
insists that this unity, causality, and so on consists only in the terms
themselves, and is conceived by relational concepts in the mind. This is
the view that Kant would radicalize: it is through a property of our mind,
the form of outer sense, that we represent the shape, magnitude, and
relation of things to one another.
Weinberg (1965, 117) notes that the rise of nominalism can be partly
explained by the influence of a substance-accident ontology of relations.
Apart from Poinsot's neglected work, it is not until Charles Sanders
Peirce, William James, and (particularly) Bertrand Russell that we start
to achieve a clearer grasp of the nature and importance of relations.

20 The Primacy of Semiosis
Gilles Deleuze (1991, 99) makes this claim in his first book, Empiricism
and Subjectivity: 'Relations are external to their terms. When James calls
himself a pluralist, he does not say, in principle, anything else. This is
also the case when Russell calls himself a realist.'
Weinberg (1965, 117) claims that a 'radical innovation in metaphysics
is involved in his [Russell's] view that dyadic relations are not reducible
to monadic attributes of their terms,' and that 'We owe to Russell, more
than any other single philosopher, a clear understanding of the nature
and importance of relations.'
Deely would also agree that Russell, like Thomism, recognized the
importance of the independent reality of relations for a pluralistic real-
ism, and that Russell, again like Thomistic philosophy before him,
allowed for the reality of relations as something external to the related
subjects and not merely an attribute of a subject conceived in a certain
way by the mind. A unique esse ad (being-toward) that is not 'in' some-
thing - although neither are relations floating around on their own. No
'thing' - no relations; no relations - no thing:
It was the genius of Russell, in effect, to seek in the reality of relation a way
through the mind-dependent structures of discourse to the mind-indepen-
dent reality of things. It was the genius of St. Thomas, after all those years,
to have given rise to a tradition that has within its resources the wherewithal
to uncover the very path whose existence Russell suspected but failed to
uncover. This discovery is not something to crow over. Only one man -John
Poinsot- in the long tradition of Thomistic thought, seems ever to have sus-
pected, as Russell did, that the path was there (Deely 1975, 306)
Deely also claims (1982, 199) that James 'among the moderns came
perhaps closest to a semiotic understanding of this matter [of rela-
tions].'James is critical of atomistic empiricism and its assumption that
there are no real connections between perceptions or sensations; but he
is also critical of Kant's 'solution' to how to join together the putatively
isolated bits of sensation. James develops a 'radical empiricism' in which
he argues that conjunctive relations are just as immediately given as dis-
junctive relations.6 Deely likewise argues (ibid., 115) that the 'initial syn-
thesis of sensations made by the mind is not arbitrary or habit
controlled, as the early moderns, notably Hume, opined, but naturally
determined by semiotic means.' 'Sense data' are neither intrinsic proper-
ties of physical things, nor merely subjective constructs, but rather real-
istically relational and 'two-faced' or Janus-like.8

An Even Briefer History of Relations 21
For James, as for Deleuze, the importance of emphasizing pluralism
and the externality of relations lies in its critique of absolutisms or
monisms,9 which claim that relations are all internal to their terms and
that relations cannot be changed without changing the 'essence' of the
thing. Moreover, in monistic accounts, 'relations' aren't really relations
because they are not distinguished from their terms. All that James and
Deleuze require is that a 'thing' be able to pick up and drop and create
new relations which are not simply deterministically derivative of some
unchanging essence.10 In Dialogues (Deleuze and Parnet 1987), Deleuze
gives the simple example of the glass of water that can be taken off the
table without changing its putative essence. In A Pluralistic Universe,
James (1977, 146), refers to the log that can take up new carriers and
drop old ones: 'The difference I try to describe amounts, you see, to
nothing more than the difference between what I formerly called the
each-form and the all-form of reality. Pluralism lets things really exist in
the each-form or distributively. Monism thinks that the all-form or col-
lective unit is the only form that is rational. The all-form allows of no
taking up and dropping of connexions, for in the all the parts are essen-
tially and eternally co-implicated.' The main point here is not to deny
interrelations but rather not to subsume them into a bloc-holism that is
ultimately non-relational!
What will be emphasized in this book is not a simplistic realism, ade-
quation, or correspondence theory of truth (e.g., in which colour is con-
sidered to be in the grass), but rather a more 'realistic realism' (to use
Latour's expression; 1999a, 15), or a semiotic 'truth of relations,' in
which a text can truly speak of the world by keeping something constant
(a pattern of relations) through a series of transformations; a relationism
in which discourse and things interact and where's there's more to life
than things and words and brains in vats - to wit, a relational collective
of coemergent properties (such as colour) that is all the more real for
its relations, a richly articulated or vascularized collective in which rela-
tions are like blood ... circulating. Says Deely (1982, 115): 'The world
appears thus (e.g., coloured) only to a subject, but it really is that way
given that totality of conditions.' A semiotic reality thus appears in which
'we speak truthfully because the world itself is articulated' (Latour
1999a, 296). Or, in other words, we arrive at a non-modernist truth in
which facts are neither real nor fabricated and all the more realistic
through sidestepping this polemics - a world in which construction and
autonomy have become synonyms. The more affects and relations a
'thing' has, the more autonomous it becomes in a manner strikingly

22 The Primacy of Semiosis
similar to Hans Jonas's portrayal of Spinoza's theory of organism,
although not restricted to the 'living.' Autonomy comes together with
openness: 'The more individuality is focused in a self, the wider is its
periphery of communication with other things; The more isolated the
more related it is' (Jonas 1965, 57).
To avoid any suggestion that Kant is being portrayed in this book as a
radical idealist denying any external reality ('what you eat is not dust'),
let us make a brief detour by way of the 'Konigsberg broadcast.'11
Deely reads Kant's epistemology as a failed attempt to steer a course
between realism and idealism. As we shall see, in Deely's analysis Kant is
barred from knowledge of how the world really (realistically) works
because of his emphasis on the way the human species - and therefore
every human subject - processes experience. From the perspective of
the primacy of relations, we shall treat Kant's transcendental idealism in
a similar manner.
Having said this, nonetheless, there are a number of statements in
Kant's writings that do partially qualify this picture.
First, Kant does have something to say about how the domain of the
noumenal ground relates to the way humans experience the world
around them. However, this relation is itself not observable but only stip-
ulated of necessity - it is specified as an epistomologically necessary, mini-
mal constraint. In Critique of Pure Reason, Kant (1978a, A287/B344)
notes that it is possible that our human way of knowing the world is only
one specific manner of doing so. He wonders 'whether there may not be
objects' for a 'quite different intuition and a quite different understand-
ing from ours.' If so, we need to assume a ground permitting a variety of
realizations of noumenal 'stuff - that is, alternative appearances and
phenomena. Beyond that abstract notion of relation as necessary condi-
tion, Kant also regards things-in-themselves (to which the world has
been reduced) as the 'true correlate of sensibility.' Ontologically speak-
ing, what we experience is not a world separate from the noumenal, but
rather its specific human reflection.
Second, a radically idealist reading of Kant finds it difficult to account
for his statements concerning the function of the human senses. The
senses play an important role in Kantian cognition; furthermore, all sen-
sible representation is 'a modification by the object in question' (Kant
1992a, para 4). Here we have a relation in principle between what really
is out there and how humans are able to experience it. For Kant (ibid.,
para. 3), sensibility is 'the receptivity of a subject in virtue of which it is
possible for the subject's own representative state to be affected in a def-

An Even Briefer History of Relations 
23
inite way by the presence of some object.' However, we should add, we
are not in a position to know the putative unconditioned ground of our
experience in the same definitive way in which we can know what
appears to us. Kant (1978a, A15/B19) carefully distinguishes between
these 'two stems of human knowledge': objects that are 'given to us'
through our senses and the 'thought' that we add via our understand-
ing. Furthermore, Kant (1978b, para. 15, 17-20) distinguishes 'sense' as
our faculty of intuition in the presence of an object from our 'outer
sense' as the affection of the body by physical things.
Third, idealist readings tend to use 'idea' to cover a variety of distinct
terms in Kant, such as Anschauungen (lookings-at/intuitions), Vorstellung
(mental projection), and Idee. Kant strictly forbids us to use 'idea' in
conjunction with appearances and phenomena of the world before us.
As he says, 'the idea is a concept of reason whose object can be met with
nowhere in experience' (1992b, 590). In other words, mere ideas are
clearly separated from our realizations of the actual world. In contrast,
appearances and subsequent phenomena are conditioned by a ground
outside the human faculties - that is, the Ding-an-sich. Earlier, in the Pro-
legomena (1985, 374), he wrote: 'All cognition of things merely from
pure understanding or pure reason is nothing but sheer illusion, and
only in experience is there truth.' It is not surprising, then, that Kant
(1967, 253) reprimands Fichte's idealism for having merely conjured up
a 'real object out of logic.'
Kant intended to provide a new explanation of cognition by retaining
certain aspects of the rationalism of idealism, on the one hand, and the
receptivity of empiricism, on the other (1978a, A13/B61ff.) In this he
had only limited success. The weight of his descriptions is heavily on the
side of how we process sensible information, rather than on the con-
straints that nature imposes on us. An inquiry into the primacy of re-
lations demands a more positive approach to such 'constraints,' or
encounters, rather than the minimalist acknowledgment that Kant
accords them.
One place to look for such a positive approach is in the work of Bruno
Latour and Isabelle Stengers, for whom the main partner to be ques-
tioned in our arguments about the world is, strangely, the world, yet a
world that is not a self-identical, formless matter which cannot be known
in any positive way, but rather a richly articulated collective of humans
and non-humans where no one is in command.

This page intentionally left blank 

2 Deleuze and External (or Ontological)
Relations
Deleuze emphasizes external relations from his first book, Empiricism
and Subjectivity, onwards. How does he understand external relations,
and why does he seek to affirm them?
First, let us look at what Deleuze does in his later article on David
Hume (1972), which provides us with one of the most compact state-
ments Deleuze ever made on these questions.
What Deleuze does is creep up behind Hume and argue that he
allows for an autonomous logic of relations whose development will
continue with Bertrand Russell and William James. This is not the way
that Hume and empiricism have normally been digested by the history
of philosophy, which presents empiricism as the theory that everything
in the understanding comes from the senses - 'the intelligible from the
sensible;' in other words, empiricism has long been seen primarily as
the opposite of rationalism.
For Deleuze, one of Hume's originalities lies in the realization that
relations are external to their terms and that this can only be under-
stood in opposition to 'rationalist' philosophies that deny the 'paradox'
of relations. In fact, Deleuze claimed that he wrote on Hume precisely
to escape the rationalist history of philosophy and its denial of external
relations.
What Deleuze is targeting are those metaphysically essentialist philos-
ophies which seek to make relations reducible or internal to their terms
or essence, or to include them within a more encompassing unity. The
logic of Western philosophy (with the notable exceptional elaborations
of Thomist and Scotist thought by Poinsot and Peirce) had largely been
based on an interpretation of the Aristotelian form of logical judgments
whereby relations were treated as attributes of a subject and those rela-

26 The Primacy of Semiosis
tions that could not be treated in this way (i.e., ontological/external
relations) were largely ignored or illegitimately reduced to attributes of
a subject or substance.
Deleuze argues that if, for Hume, ideas contain nothing other than
sensible impressions, then the relations between ideas are external to
ideas and may vary without the ideas varying - there being no absolute
unity or transcendent totalizing whole to be maintained.1 The possibility
for change, as Deleuze will affirm, is clearly the guiding force in this
novel reading of Hume's empiricism. Rather than tying relation to the
'essence' of its term, Deleuze/Hume's empiricism allows for new rela-
tions to be created between 'things/terms'; these would modify the
open and changeable multiplicity in which these terms participate.
Deleuze seems to have honed in on Hume's statement that relations are
not properties of things, but rather arise 'from the comparison which
the mind makes betwixt them.'2 So Deleuze is emphasizing the hesita-
tion in Hume between a psychological atomism and a theory of associa-
tion or continuity based on habit and 'the principles of human nature.'3
As Deleuze argues in his Hume essay, the irreducibility of relations to
their terms allows for a 'world of exteriority' whereby thought can have
a relation with the 'Outside' of thought, a world where one communi-
cates by way of external relations. He credits Hume with undoing the
constraining form of the judgment of attribution and allowing for an
autonomous logic of relations.
At this juncture, and simply for the historical record, let us note that
Poinsot had achieved a full thematic statement of this logic of relations
some hundred years prior to Hume (in 1632, and with much greater
force and subtelty), and that the Thomist and Scotist schools had clearly
grasped the basic notion of ontological or external relation as early as
the fourteenth century. Of course, this concept was to wither away from
about 1350 with the rise of nominalism. Given that Poinsot's work 'fell
deadborn from the press' with the rise of classical, modern, nominalistic
philosophy in the seventeenth century, it is to the young Deleuze's
credit that he was inventive enough to discover external relations in
Hume, where few had sought to find them. Nevertheless, Hume's exter-
nal relation still falls short of Poinsot's ontological relation, for whereas
this includes both relatio realisand relatio rationis, Hume's 'comparison' is
only relatio rationis - thus it is external but not ontological.
Deleuze and Guattari make external relations do a lot of work, and in
Dialogues^ Deleuze adds a few more details to the Hume story, explain-
ing why he wrote about empiricism (D, 54-9). I will quote and annotate

Deleuze and External (or Ontological) Relations 27
extensively from these pages, as they provide one of the finest state-
ments Deleuze ever made on relations:
Things do not begin to live except in the middle. In this respect what is it
that the empiricists found, not in their heads, but in the world, which is
like a vital discovery, a certainty of life which, if one really adheres to it,
changes one's way of life? It is not the question "Does the intelligible come
from the sensible?" but a quite different question, that of relations. Rela-
tions are external to their terms. "Peter is smaller than Paul," "The glass is on
the table": relation is neither internal to one of the terms which would con-
sequently be subject, nor to two together. Moreover, a relation may change
without the terms changing. One may object that the glass is perhaps
altered when it is moved off the table, but this is not true. The ideas of the
glass and the table are not altered. Relations are in the middle, and exist as
such. (D, 55)
The critical issue for Deleuze is that this logic of relations is particu-
larly crucial with respect to philosophy's problem of being, is, and the
judgment of attribution (Aristotelian substance/accident categorial
schema). He argues that it is primarily the English and the Americans
(Russell, James, Whitehead, Peirce) who have developed this reflection
on relations and that in order to free relations from the verb to be, AND
must be substituted for is. This contaminates the whole of the categorial
schema (as we have already seen with our meditation on transcendental
and ontological relations in chapter 1).
Furthermore, this AND is not a specific relation; rather, 'it is that which
subtends all relations, which makes relations shoot outside their terms,
and outside of everything that could be detemined as Being, One, or
Whole. The AND as extra-being, inter-being' (D, 57).
'Thinking with AND, instead of thinking IS, instead of thinking for IS:
empiricism has never had another secret. Try it, it is an extraordinary
thought, and yet it is life' (D, 57).
Deleuze notes that it was Jean Wahl who introduced him to the British
empiricists, particularly byway of Wahl's Vers le concret (1932), which has
extended chapters on Whitehead and James.The section of Dialogues I
am quoting from and discussing is titled On the Superiority of Anglo-Ameri-
can Literature.
The conclusion to William James's A Pluralistic Universe (1977, 145) is
'remarkably' resonant here: 'Pragmatically interpreted, pluralism or the
doctrine that it is many means only that the sundry parts of reality may be

28 The Primacy of Semiosis
externally related. Everything you can think of, however vast or inclusive,
has on the pluralistic view a genuinely 'external' environment of some
sort or another. Things are with one another in many ways, but nothing
includes everything, or dominates over everthing. The word "and" trails
along after every sentence. Something always escapes.'
Deleuze will give another twist to this story of external relations,
which is one of the most important aspects of his and Guattari's later
work - MULTIPLICITY (for Deleuze, philosophy is the theory of multi-
plicities) . The critical point here is that the word AND is not conceived as
numerically additive (as in 'one more' glass of wine). Multiplicity has
become a noun, as opposed to the multiple, which as an adjective is 'still
subordinate to the One which divides or the Being which encompasses
it.' (D, 57). In the preface to the English-language edition of Dialogues,
Deleuze strongly emphasizes the concept of multiplicity as a characteris-
tic of empiricism, in contrast to rationalist philosophies, which start with
the One, the Whole, the Subject, and then speculate on how such
abstractions are embodied 'in a world that has been made to conform to
their requirements (this can be knowledge, virtue, history ...)' (D, vii).
Deleuze's empiricism starts instead with multiplicities that are states of
things rather than unities or totalities. The essential point for Deleuze is
that every 'thing' is in fact a multiplicity of irreducible dimensions, an
open continuum/becoming of inseparable relations that cannot be
reduced to their terms (ENTITY = EVENT). These relations are not like
fixed ropes or lines between self-identical metaphysical subjects, but
mobile, fieldlike relationalities that can be modified without having to
change the purported static 'essence' of the terms. These terms are
essentially relative but distinguished from the relations, and a change in the
mobile field of actual relations that the terms are involved in will quali-
tatively alter the processual multiplicity or continuum that the terms
'are.' As we have seen with the distinction between transcendental and
ontological relations in experience, every 'thing,' or term, is relative in
one of two ways:5 (1) the very being of a thing or individual requires that
it be understood in relation to and as dependent on factors outside
itself- every thing is transcendentally 'relative'; or (2) the relations that
the thing/term/being/subject are in fact involved in are the external/
ontological relations. The interbeing or inter subjective field that is
'between things.' Relations are external to their terms.
For example, I could take an empty plastic milk crate and place it in a
garden pond as a support for a fountain and haven for small fish. I have
not changed the purported essence of the 'milk crate,' but the relations

Deleuze and External (or Ontological) Relations 29
or interactions that the 'milk crate' is involved in have changed, and the
'milk crate' can now only be understood in relation to the new assem-
blage of relations that it has actually entered into. (It is slightly more
complex than this, requiring a semiotic analysis of how the objects of
human experience are constituted, and come to be distinguished as
things in a prejacent physical environment, but we'll get to that eventu-
ally. The trick is that every thing is first of all an object of experience and
many objects are not things - and many things may never become objects.}
Deleuze simply gives the example of a glass on a table (D, 55). When
the glass is moved off the table, the relation between the two has
changed but not the idea of the glass and the table. He argues, further-
more, that the very book Dialogues, ostensibly written by Gilles Deleuze
and Claire Parnet, is 'between' in several senses: not only between
Deleuze and Parnet, and between other books with Felix Guattari, but
also in the sense that it is a multiplicity of external bifurcating lines/
relations that cannot be attributed or reduced to individuals - particu-
larly as the 'individuals' were also qualitatively changing as the book developed.
It becomes a book without a subject (or an object). To think this can be
difficult, because, in the process thought itself becomes 'subjectless.'
So, as we have seen, Deleuze extracts external relations from Hume
and subsequently continues to use this tool as a vital part of his philo-
sophical work, which reaches (perhaps) its most extraordinary develop-
ment with Felix Guattari in A Thousand Plateaus (ATP). However, before
moving into the land of plateaus I would like to engage with Deleuze's
The Logic of Sense (LS), which undertakes an important development of
the use of external relations that will enable us to feel the resonance
between Deleuze and Poinsot/Deely's understanding of the relation
between words and things, or propositions and states of affairs.
The Logic of Sense (together with Difference and Repetition [DR]) is recog-
nized as a turning point in Deleuze's oeuvre, wherein he, by his own
admission, starts to 'do philosophy' instead of merely producing 'read-
ings' (remarkable though they may be) of other thinkers (e.g.,
Nietzsche, Spinoza, Hume, Bergson, Kant). What is Deleuze doing in
LS?6 In the preface, he tells us that he is presenting a series of paradoxes
that will form a theory of sense, one that develops out of an engagement
with Lewis Carroll's work and Stoic philosophy. The work is paradoxical
because 'sense is a nonexisting entity.' For our purposes we will connect
primarily with the Stoic series.
As Jean-Jacques Lecercle astutely observes in his fine introduction to
LS,7 although various theories of meaning have been developed in ana-

30 The Primacy of Semiosis
lytical philosophy (e.g., those of Frege, Russell, Wittgenstein, and Straw-
son), Deleuze, for reasons that I hope will become apparent, largely
ignores this tradition and returns to Stoic semiotics (one of the first the-
ories of the sign, or philosophies of language) .8 Note that Deely also
returns to an earlier tradition (that of Poinsot's semiotics) for a logic of
sense that we will use here to intersect with Deleuze's logic.
For Deely (1990, 18), the main problem of so-called linguistic philos-
ophy is that it fails to give an account of how we can talk about non-exis-
tent things, this being one of the most notable features of human
language. Linguistic philosophy attempts to treat language as primarily
involved in mirroring or developing a point-by-point correspondence
with an external, non-linguistic reality. In the analytical approach,
meaning and truth only occur when there is a direct referential corre-
spondence between words and things. For similar reasons, Deleuze and
Deely both consider this approach completely inadequate.
The Circle of the Proposition
Deleuze demonstrates that the commonly recognized functions of
denotation, manifestation, and signification are incapable of account-
ing for their own genesis, as they are involved in a relation of circular,
reciprocal presupposition; and that the proposition in fact presupposes
an element or 'stratum' that is unconditioned and thus capable of gen-
erating denotation and the other prepositional functions. This 'fourth
dimension' of the proposition is sense, or that which, in the proposition, is
expressed. It is an incorporeal event, one that is related to the proposition
and the denoted states of affairs but irreducible to neither and not
derived from their correspondence. Sense becomes an external or onto-
logical relation, an interface, 'the boundary between propositions and
things' (LS, 22).
The tradition that Deleuze presents (which has often been recapitu-
lated in the secondary Deleuzian literature) goes briefly like this: The Sto-
ics discovered another dimension to the proposition - sense, or the lekton,
which Deleuze claims was subsequently rediscovered by Gregory of Rimini
in the fourteenth century (on whom more later), and again by Meinong
at the end of the nineteenth century (as well as by Husserl, although with
some qualifications). Here is how Deleuze sets up the problem:
The question is as follows: is there something, aliquid, which merges nei-
ther with the proposition or with the terms of the proposition, nor with the

Deleuze and External (or Ontological) Relations 31
object or with the state of affairs which the proposition denotes, neither
with the 'lived,' or representation or the mental activity or the person who
expresses herself in the proposition, nor with the concepts or signified
essences? The Stoics said it all: neither word nor body, neither sensible rep-
resentation nor rational representation. Better yet, perhaps sense would be
'neutral,' altogether indifferent to both particular and general, singular
and universal, personal and impersonal. (LS, 19)
The answer for Deleuze is that we can infer sense as that which has
neither physical nor mental existence - or rather, it has that minimum of
being which allows it to be irreducible to either of these two distinctions
and which enables their very distinction. This notion of minimal being
(the ens minimum of the latin West)9 is a crucial piece of this puzzle, and
we will return to it. For the moment, suffice it to write that sense and onto-
logical or external relation have the same minimum of being that allows
them to be indifferent to the mind-dependent, mind-independent dis-
tinction, and that it is Poinsot (rediscovered and translated by Deely)
who appears to first fully realize the implications of this unique ontolog-
ical feature of relation for a science of signs or semiotic - a science that
would be displaced (historically) by the rise of the essentially unsemi-
otic, nominalist, national-language modern philosophies.
In Dialogues (62-76), Deleuze explains why he chose to write about
the Stoics. He claims that their great strength and originality lay in no
longer separating the sensible from the intelligible, but in distinguish-
ing between things and events that could not be reduced to their spatio-
temporal manifestation. The event (or sense) is an 'incorporeal vapour,'
an infinitive that is the expressed of the proposition and an attribute of
things ('to redden,' 'to turn green,' 'to cut,' 'to die,' 'to love'). Deleuze
sees this as another way of avoiding the is: 'The attribute is no longer a
quality related to the subject by the indicative "is," it is any verb whatever
in the infinitive which emerges from a state of things and skims over it'
(D, 63). Deleuze gives the example of the event of cutting10 (another is
that of the battle), which belongs to a different order of being from the
knife, or the flesh, or their conjunction. It is not a physical property of
things: it insists in them and subsists in language - that is, the event is not
a thing but an infinitive (or, as Poinsot would say, a relation). Events are
'where' language and things are linked: the proposition designates
things and expresses events, and events are attributed to things and
expressed in propositions. That which is expressed is neither the thing
nor the proposition but a 'non-existent entity,' or an ontological rela-

32 The Primacy of Semiosis
tion that allows there to be this interface. The 'sense' of the proposition
has a kind of ontological parity with the events that are happening to
things; it is the univocity of ontological relation, which is the impercepti-
ble event of sense: 'We will not ask therefore what is the sense of the
event: the event is sense itself (LS, 22).
This is a complex and inspired attempt by Deleuze to construct an
ontology based on relational becomings, inspired by empiricism and
external relations, which act as signs relating 'the interiority of language
to the exteriority of being' (LS, 185). He is constructing an ontology/
logic of sense that is effectively a semiotics based on ontological or external
relations - but doing so with unfamiliar and complicated tools that he
must constantly reinvent and adapt for his own ends. In his later work
with Guattari, a semiotics inspired significantly by Charles Sanders
Peirce and Jakob von Uexkiill will complexify this logic of sense and give
it its full amplitude as a social pragmatics concerned with the creation
and articulation of relations in mobile assemblages, rather than with the
representation of things (the traditional 'realist' image of thought as
the more or less successful representation or resemblance by an individ-
ualized subject of the way things are). An 'ethico-aesthetic' paradigm, as
Guattari will characterize his final work, Chaosmosis; a semiotics rather
than a traditional ontology, epistemology, or semiology.
But what happened to Gregory of Rimini?
As we have noted, Deleuze traces a line from the Stoics through Gre-
gory of Rimini to modern analytic logic (e.g., Meinong's 'extra-being');
and it might help us to follow this buried line a little farther.
The Complex Theme of the Proposition
Who was Gregory of Rimini, and why would Deleuze refer to this almost
totally ignored thinker?
In his fine article, 'The Coalescence of Semiotic Consciousness'
(1986a, 6), Deely contends that the most important period in the devel-
opment of a 'semiotic consciousness' that would surpass the traditional
ontological-epistemological analysis of knowledge was 1350 to 1650; and
he observes that this is one of the most poorly researched periods in the
history of philosophy - a kind of 'black hole' between Ockham and Des-
cartes during which there emerged a complex reflection on language,
the nature of concepts, and the action of signs.
Gregory of Rimini (1300-58),n of the Eremite Order of Saint August-
ine (who died on the edge of the black hole of philosophy), is often

Deleuze and External (or Ontological) Relations 33
placed in the Ockhamist or nominalist school. Yet his novel ideas on
what a proposition actually signifies (i.e., the 'object' of the proposi-
tion) distance him from Ockham, who is specifically criticized by Gre-
gory of Rimini; Gregory is in many ways much closer to Scotus.12
Deleuze does not actually say a great deal about Gregory, and refers
with praise to H. Elie's Le Complexe significabile (1936) as providing the
filiation between Gregory and phenomenology (Husserl, Meinong).
What is remarkable is that in 1968-9 Deleuze makes a connection
between the Stoic origins of the problem of the lekton as the incorpo-
real 'expressed of the proposition' and Gregory's theory of the ' complexe
significabile.'HJGJGuze clearly enjoys discovering/inventing this tradi-
tion, which he will adapt to his own uses and seek to rescue from its
modern phenomenological and analytical interment in the 'tomb of
individual consciousness.'14 For someone who has 'a hatred of Anterior-
ity,' this is important. It is also important for our story, as it is Poinsot
who at the end of the black hole of philosophy, with his Tractatus de Sig-
nis (1632), provided a synthesis that condensed the previous three hun-
dred years of scholastic thought on sign relations, as well as an
alternative path to the one taken by the mainstream modern philosophy
of representation in its denial of external or ontological relations (e.g.,
by treating 'ideas' as the direct objects of awareness, or in other words as
representations, rather than as imperceptible sign relations of which we are
not directly aware}. Poinsot was virtually ignored for the following three
hundred years; it was Peirce who began to reinvent in his own terms a
semiotic that could escape the prison house of inferiority and its screen
of concepts.15
To get a better understanding of Gregory of Rimini, we must try to
step back to the 'subtle doctor,' Duns Scotus (1266-1308), who just pre-
ceded Gregory and whose 'subtle' doctrines had a determining influ-
ence on the debates around cognition and metaphysics over the
following three hundred years, up to Poinsot's synthesis - and who influ-
enced much of the structure of modern philosophy. The goal here is
not so much to give an exegetical account of Gregory's understanding
of the object of the proposition, but rather to outline the constellation
of issues that were emerging during this period. This will allow us to bet-
ter appreciate the importance of Poinsot's work and its relevance to
Deleuze and Guattari's philosophy of multiplicity.
As we noted in chapter 1, during the thirteenth century the medieval
notion of transcendentality or the transcendentals, as that which sur-
passed the Aristotelian categories by being common to all of them (ens

34 The Primacy of Semiosis
vagans/vagrant being), gave rise to a metaphysical reflection on being-
as-being (ens inquantum est ens). Metaphysics became ontology in the
thirteenth century, and with this emerged the possibility of an awareness
of a domain of being irreducible to things (ens reale} or thought (ens
rationis).
To the extent that Scotus is remembered today, it is for the concepts
of the univocity of being, the formal distinction, and objective being
(esse objectivum). How are these interrelated, and why were they relevant
to Gregory of Rimini and John Poinsot, as well as (today) to the very
structure of modern philosophy?
Let us start with univocity as the least difficult entry point, although
univocity is really a corrollary of the formal distinction.
Duns Scotus wants to specify the proper object of metaphysics as an
abstract science of being, distinct from theology and physics. Theology
is concerned with God through the concept of'infinite being'; physics is
concerned with the being of individual things. Thus if metaphysics is to
be something other than a physics, it must have a univocal concept of
being that is not restricted to the being of material things but grasps
being in a universal way, or being-as-being. The object of metaphysics, as
something real and common, cannot be formulated in either logical or
numerical terms. It is not simply a being of reason, nor is it a being of
individual existents that are numerically and irreducibly distinct from
one another. For metaphysics to have an object, it must consider the
concept of being at the highest level of abstraction so that it can be said
in one and the same way of everything. This is the 'univocity' of being.
Being is said in the same sense of everything (including God and crea-
tures).16 As Deleuze remarks (DR, 35): 'In the greatest book of pure
ontology, the Opus Oxoniense, being is understood as univocal, but univo-
cal being is understood as neutral, neuter, indiffent to the distinction
between the finite and the infinite, the singular and the universal, the
created and the uncreated.'17 So here emerges a concept of being dis-
tinguished by Duns Scotus from the being of individual things, from
logic (beings of reason/ ens rationis}, and from theology (infinite being).
For Duns Scotus this is a 'formal distinction,' a 'formality,' one that
goes beyond the Aristotelian division of distinction into only two types,
'of reason' or 'of nature' - a subtle, Scotist third distinction between
things and thought. Nevertheless, for him this distinction is on the side
of the nature of the thing (ex natura ret). It is not an abstraction of the
intellect but has a foundation in things between essence and existence,
between the universal and the particular.18

Deleuze and External (or Ontological) Relations 35
Thus, univocity of being arises from awareness of the fact that the real
is neither pure universality nor pure individuality. This distinct univocity
relates to a real distinction in the thing, or rather 'on the side of the
thing.' The concept of univocity of being corresponds to a real third dis-
tinction lex natura rei,' and this is of key importance for Scotus. The
being 'as known' (i.e., in the scholastic use of the term, its 'objective' real-
ity) is identical to its 'formal reality' or real being.
Which brings us to the Scotist doctrine of esse objectivum or 'objective
being,' a doctrine that right from the start must be emphasized as con-
cerning that which exists in awareness - whatever is, is, for us, first of all an
'object' of an act of awareness. For Scotus, reality has a formal being in
its mind-independent reality and an objective being in thought. Yet the
modern philosophy of representation and its epistemology has in effect
abandoned any real knowledge of a mind-independent reality, or (with
Heidegger) had developed a 'novel' approach in which human dis-
course reveals 'Being' itself.
If, for Scotus, metaphysical being is a concept prior to the distinction
between mind-dependent and mind-independent - 'being' as the first
natural object of our understanding (ens ut primum cognitum ab intellectu
nostro) - it is nevertheless an object of awareness, and to this extent it is,
for him, a representation - it has an esse repraesentatum in the intellect
that apprehends it. An object is an object to the extent that it is an
object of cognition. This, then, is the beginning of the modern notion
of the object as a representation in thought (an esse objectivum}. And
from here much confusion will develop, because Scotus conceives of the
objective being as an 'instrumental sign,' that is, as something of which
one is directly aware, something that then, subsequently, leads to an
awareness of something else. Concepts become signs that we are directly
aware of - they subsequently make one aware of something else - but
for Scotus and the modern philosophy of representation, ideas are first
of all directly perceived and then related to something else. This, we will
come to realize, is the heart of the problem of cognition, and it is Poin-
sot who manages to overcome the inevitable problems that Scotus' esse
objectivum would lead to. For if the objective being of a thing is its repre-
sentation to a cogito, what is the relation between the representation and
the thing that is represented?
But what happened to Gregory of Rimini and the complexe significabile'?
As the reader will have undoubtedly realized, Scotus' formal distinction
and esse objectivum of the concept might be related to the 'sense' of the
proposition that Deleuze traces from the Stoics through Gregory to

36 The Primacy of Semiosis
Meinong, Frege, and Husserl. Just as metaphysics has a univocal concept
of being, there is something special about the 'object' or 'sense' of the
proposition.19 In fact Gregory appears to define the principal themes of
the philosophy of sense as they will reappear in analytical philosophy
In the fourteenth century, as today, there were three possible concep-
tions of the object of a proposition: that of Ockham, for whom the
object of the proposition was the reflexive act of thinking it; that of
Walter Chatton, for whom the object concerned the extramental thing;
and that of Gregory of Rimini, for whom the object of the proposition
(and especially of scientific propositions) was the 'total and adequate
signified.'
The object of the proposition is its esse objectivum, to be distinguished
from the reflexive act of thinking of the object of the proposition. Nei-
ther is the expressed of the proposition the thing in its concrete reality.
This distinction is similar to Meinong's objective. For example, the
'being-blue-of-the-sky' (the objective) is a distinct 'something' separate
from the sky, yet irreducible to a mental entity or to the linguistic
expression.
To recapitulate: for Gregory the object (or 'conclusion') of a proposi-
tion is not self-reflexive. One's attention is not on the act of concluding,
but goes directly to the meaning of the conclusion. What is designated is
what is signified, and this is neither the extra-mental thing nor the act of
thinking the conclusion. Ockham, however, reduces the direct intellec-
tion of the prepositional act to a reflexive form of intellection. Gregory
understands 'objectively' what Ockham understands subjectively. For
Ockham, it is the proposition itself that is known - it does not lead
directly to something other than itself ('only propositions are
known').20 For Gregory, the object of a proposition is what the proposi-
tion signifies - that is, its 'total complex signified' - and the intellect
gives its attention to this directly, not self-reflexively.
In Difference and Repetition (DR, 156), Deleuze gives a brief account of
Gregory's complex theme as 'sense': 'It is distinguished from the propo-
sition itself because it relates to the object as though it were its logical
attribute, its "statable" or "expressible." It is the complex theme of the
proposition, and, as such, the first term of knowledge.' Sense is extra-
propositional.
Both Deleuze and Muralt note that Gregory of Rimini's analysis finds
a precursor in Stoic logic, where the object of the proposition is that
which the proposition expresses, - that is, the lekton (for the Stoics this
is the only incorporeal entity in the material universe). What is even

Deleuze and External (or Ontological) Relations 37
more remarkable is the manner in which contemporary reflection con-
tinues the Gregorian approach to the logic of sense. For example,
Muralt (1991, 138) claims that Husserl effectively repeats Gregory when
he analyses the sense of the 'expressions' of human language and the
subjective acts of consciousness that correspond to them. Thus Husserl
also distinguishes between the objectivity expressed by the linguistic
expression and the objectivity signified by it. Husserl sees this distinc-
tion arising in the comparison of expressions which, while naming the
same thing, have a different sense (e.g., equilateral triangle and isogo-
nal triangle, morning and evening star). Frege also uses this distinction
between the Sinn (sense) of a proposition and its Bedeutung (objective
signification).
One of the challenges of this book will be to show how Poinsot suc-
ceeds in incorporating both elements of Scotus' 'objective being' (esse
objectivurri) and Gregory's object of the proposition without falling into
the representationalist theory wherein the representation becomes the
absolute term of cognition.
Now what is the being of the complexe significabik, or the signified of
the proposition? It is not a physical thing, but it is nonetheless aliquid
(something) that is more than a psychological act. It has the being of an
'object,' esse objectivum, which constitutes, for Duns Scotus, the being of
the known in the knower; and it will be Poinsot who shows how this esse
objectivum can be understood in a relational rather than an entitative
sense - as an interface or pure relation, rather than as an obstacle or
impenetrable screen between mind and matter. It is what Deleuze and
Guattari will call the 'outside' of thought, which is not the external
world but rather that from which the opposition external/internal can
even arise.
Poinsot will clarify how there can be a relation between the object (or
'propos' or expressed) of the proposition and physical things or states
of affairs (although experience, cognition, and semiosis will not be
reducible to this paradigm case). It is that which in a proposition is
indifferent or neutral to the mind-dependent or mind-independent dis-
tinction. It can relate being and 'non-being' because it remains a rela-
tion in either case. It is, as we will come to understand, the univocity of
the sign relation, the univocity of sense (the 'extra-being,' to use
Meinong's terminology). What Deleuze and Poinsot do is make this
objective being an event or relation - a metaphysical field of objective,
external, ontological sign relations. Deleuze and Guattari will become
more interested in the onto-ethology or ecology of relations from

38 The Primacy of Semiosis
Spinoza to von Uexkiill and Bateson - the power to affect and be
affected - and in a philosophy of expression and invention, rather than
in recognition. Poinsot will use an understanding of ontological relation
to show how semiosis (the action of signs) works through the univocity
of being and non-being in the sign relation to bring about a semiotic
'objectivity' or 'reality' that provides a mobile mixture of objects that are
only objects of awareness, together with objects of awareness that are also
things; a philosophy of experience that provides for a permeable osmo-
sis between things and thought, nature and culture, the mind-depen-
dent and mind-independent, involving a semiotic 'outside' of thought
that is 'an outside more distant than any external world because it is an
inside deeper than any internal world' (WIP, 59).
What must be emphasized is that we are concerned here not with a
traditional image of thought as an adequation with an external, self-
identical, 'objective' world (in the modern philosophical sense), but
with an encounter with an exteriority beyond any external (or internal)
world. Creation, or an 'ethico-aesthetic' paradigm, takes precedence
over recognition and resemblance.
As Francois Zourabichvili (1996, 34) has elegantly expressed the mat-
ter, it is not a question of whether rocks, animals, and other human
beings exist; this is not the issue: 'The question is to know under what
conditions the thinking subject enters into a relation with an unknown
element, and if for that it's sufficient to go to the zoo, walk around an
ashtray on the table, chat with one's friends, or travel around the world.
The question is to know what determines a mutation in thought and if
it's really in this way that thought has an encounter.'21
What is at issue is the possibility of an encounter with an Outside irre-
ducible to an external or internal world, a univocal Outside of thought
composed of relations external to their terms.

3 Poinsot and Deely on Relations and Signs
It is not simply a question of stating the exteriority of relations, but of producing
the concept. What is the status of this unrecognized and yet encountered
object? It is the sign that escapes representation.
Zourabichvili (1996, 36-7)
Duns Scotus is a crucial figure in that his concept of esse objectivum set
the stage for a set of controversies regarding the nature of signification
and the status of concepts as signs. Gregory of Rimini's complexe significa-
bile is one example of a decidedly Scotist treatment of the nature of the
object of a proposition, and as we have noted, this issue is also engaged
with by modern analytical philosophy and phenomenology (e.g., Hus-
serl and Meinong). What is less often appreciated is just how much
these questions were debated throughout the late scholastic period
leading up to Poinsot's semiotic synthesis in 1632.1
The point of departure was Scotus' development of Avicenna's pro-
posal that being-as-being should be held to be the first natural object of
our understanding. This was not the Aristotelian being of the things of a
mind-independent world, nor was it the being of thoughts or reason;
rather, it was being-as-being as an object of cognition. And here every-
thing started to become complicated. For Scotus and Poinsot, some-
thing was an 'objective being' to the extent that it existed in awareness. The
sun and the sea were 'objective beings,' but so were unicorns - they also
existed 'in' our awareness. So, within experience, all beings were by def-
inition objective beings. However, not all of them were physical things
or events. (We will keep returning to this question of 'objective being,'
as it will provide us with a conceptual tool for dealing with all the mate-

40 The Primacy of Semiosis
rial that will be presented in this book.) This notion of 'objective being'
(the status of the immanence of the known in the knower) was the prin-
cipal point of contention in the debates between the medieval schools -
principally Thomist and Scotist - over the last of the Latin centuries.
Linked to this problematic was the growing realization that concepts
or ideas act as signs - they bring something into awareness other than
themselves. The centre of gravity of the debates concerned the defini-
tion and action of signs. Throughout the period between Duns Scotus
and John Poinsot a complex terminology started to appear and to be
refined. Descartes, 'the father of modern philosophy,' would unfortu-
nately ignore this accumulated capital of reflection on the structure of
experience and assume that ideas are not signs, but rather the direct
objects of experience (such as sensible things) that represent them-
selves. Scotus' objective being mutated into an object for a 'cogito,' or sub-
ject (it became immanent to a cogito), and an insurmountable wall
(overcome only by God) was thus created between objective being (as
known) and the 'formal reality' of things.
As Deely (1978, 5) clearly informs us, the definition of signs that laid
the foundation for the Western interrogation on signs was the one laid
down by Augustine in the fifth century: 'Augustine defined a sign as
"something that, besides the impressions it conveys to sense, makes
something else come into cognition."2 Translating more freely, we can
say that Augustine defines the sign as anything that, on being perceived
brings something besides itself into awareness.'
By the time we reach the period we are dealing with (1350-1650)
there was growing debate in the medieval schools over the nature of sig-
nification, the question of universals, the structure of propositions, the
understanding of concepts as signs, and so on. Deely (1986a, 10-11)
gives us a critically important example of this development of semiotic
terminology, which I will attempt to present with little modification. He
contends - and extensive historical research supports him - that the
most important and relatively neglected centres of semiotic inquiry dur-
ing the period in question were in the university traditions of Spain and
Portugal (principally Coimbra in Portugal and Salamanca and Alcala in
Spain).
The example Deely gives us when emphasizing how much questions
of semiotic were a principal theme of reflection is taken from the work
of Petrus Fonsecus (1528-99) the leading professor at Coimbra, whose
students and collaborators, the so-called 'Conimbricenses,' wrote a trea-
tise De Signis in 1607.3 Fonseca himself had already by 1564 given a

Poinsot and Deely on Relations and Signs 41
detailed account of a way of characterizing the action of signs - a way
that had its origins at least as far back as the fourteenth century (per-
haps with Aegidius). The main issue of reflection was whether August-
ine's definition of the sign was in fact too restrictive in requiring a sensible
aspect, in requiring a sign to be something that on being perceived would
bring something other than itself into awareness.
In this nascent semiotic doctrine, signs are divided into 'formal' and
'instrumental,' 'the former being the "forms" (species expressae) or ideas
within the mind whereby experience is structured, the latter being
words and, more generally, any sense perceptible item or object of expe-
rience which functions as a sign, i.e., to bring something other than
itself into awareness' (Deely 1986a, 10). Or, as Pedro de Fonseca puts it
in 1564:
Formal signs are similitudes or a certain type of forms of things signified
[species, as Albertus Magnus had already intimated c.1250-2] inscribed
within the cognitive powers, by means of which the things signified are per-
ceived. Of this sort is the similitude which the spectacle of a mountain
impresses upon the eyes, or the image which an absent friend leaves in
another's memory, or again the picture one forms of something which he
has never seen. These signs are called 'formal,' because they form and as it
were structure the knowing power.
Instrumental signs are those which, having become objects for knowing
powers, lead to cognition of something else. Of this sort is the track of an
animal left in the ground, smoke, or a statue, and the like. For a track is a
sign of the animal which made it: smoke the sign of an unseen fire: a statue
finally is a sign of Caesar or someone else. These signs are called 'instru-
mental,' either because through them as instruments we signify to others
our ideas; or because just as an artist must move his instrument in order to
shape his material with it, so must powers able to know first perceive these
signs in order to know anything through them.
Hence may be gathered the most striking difference between instrumen-
tal and formal signs: since indeed formal signs do not have to be perceived
by us in order for us to come to an awareness of the thing signified by the
perception they structure; but unless instrumental signs are perceived, they
lead no one to an awareness of anything.4
So here we see a distinction being made between instrumental signs,
which are sense perceptible, and formal signs, which are not. Fonseca,
nevertheless, downplays this criticism of Augustine's definition. He

42 The Primacy of Semiosis
accepts a distinction between perceptible and imperceptible signs, but
as a nominalist he does not understand a common mode of being
(ontological relation) operating in both types of sign. As we shall come
to see, this terminology 'instrumental/formal' remains insufficient until
it is understood how both kinds of sign serve as the foundation for an
ontological relation that is other than or external to its foundation or
'vehicle.' Fonseca does not realize this and makes the formal sign a
purely subjective determination (it is not distinguished from its founda-
tion) . For Poinsot the sign-vehicle founds a relation to something other
than itself. This 'ontological' or 'external' relation is what is proper to
both instrumental and formal signs; as a pure relation, it cannot be per-
ceived but can be understood. Poinsot realizes this (and Peirce and
Deleuze5 will start from this realization of thirdness as external to its
terms, operating in nature and culture alike).
Now it happens that Poinsot spent some time (1604-6) at the Univer-
sity of Coimbra studying with the group of professors, the Conimbri-
censes, organized by Pedro de Fonseca (who died in 1599). We now
turn to Poinsot, an important figure, in order to appreciate how
he developed these semiotic reflections and brilliantly and uniquely
grasped the importance of a theory of relations for the nascent doctrine of signs.
This was Poinsot's singular achievement, and it is John Deely's achieve-
ment to have unearthed this 'neglected figure,' who was the first to
demonstrate clearly that experience is a univocal web of sign relations
or semiotic web: 'So an animal, a thing, is never separable from its rela-
tions with the world' (Deleuze 1988a, 125).
Objective Being
To understand this move from a theory of relations to a doctrine of
signs, we must return to the question of objective being, as it is a crucial
and unavoidable element in the development of semiotics.
It seems that no thematic treatment of the history of objective being
has yet been written (although Andre de Muralt intended to write one).
My goal here is not to attempt what would be for me impossible -
namely, to provide some panoramic view of medieval thought; rather, it
is simply to attempt to indicate the relation between Duns Scotus'
understanding and Poinsot's, and their distinction from a traditional
account of the Thomist understanding of cognition and intentionality.
Histories of medieval thought never seem to grasp the importance of
Poinsot's semiotic, when they mention it at all. The matter is inherently

Poinsot and Deely on Relations and Signs 43
complex, and all the more so because it is possible to question the overly
realist accounts of Thomism and their critiques of Scotism and there-
by to show a compatibility between Scotism and Poinsot's semiotic
Thomism.
In a traditional Thomist account of cognition (as also for Scotism),
the central issue is the relation between the knower and the known
(nearly always thought of as a physical thing). For traditional Thomism
there is an immaterial or intentional direct union between the knower and
the known. How does this occur? A tree or a stone does not exist in the
mind according to its material or natural being but as an intentional
being,8 or immaterial and spiritual being. The nature of this being is that
of a relation or interface; it is not that of an obstacle between the
knower and the known that would first be known reflexively before the
thing was known. A unity is posited between the knower and the known.
Thought has an immaterial, non-entitative nature and does not need to
get outside itself to know the intelligible 'essence' of a thing. This inten-
tionality is a descriptive concept that expresses the openness of the
mind to what is other than itself. It is a 'being-toward' of thought open
to that which is other than itself (normally understood as the intelligible
physical environment). This being-toward, or intentionality of thought,
will reappear with Brentano and subsequently with Husserlian phenom-
enology in a more idealistic form (the intentionality never escapes the
transcendental subject). Whitehead's notion of 'prehension' is also a
version of intentionality. This notion of intentionality remained some-
what 'opaque' in early Thomism; it would be Poinsot who showed how
the concept of intentionality could be accounted for more adequately
with the concept of relation as indifferent to the opposition between the
mind-dependent (ens rationis) and the physical or mind-independent
(ens reale).
For traditional Thomist cognitivism, the emphasis is on a realism
whereby what we know directly are the things themselves in their intelli-
gibility, not copies of things in the mind (as with Descartes and represen-
tational theories). As mentioned earlier, the concept of intentionality is
descriptive of the relation between the mind and things: 'The "inten-
tional inexistence" (Brentano's later term) of the thing would designate
this junction between the knower and the known, and not an intermedi-
ary that would introduce itself between them'9 (Solere 1989, 36).
Following the expositions of Jean-Luc Solere (1989), Jacques Maritain
(1959), Mauricio Beuchot (1994), and John Deely (1994a), let us ex-
plore further this Thomist theory of cognition and intentionality. The

44 The Primacy of Semiosis
critical point is that the 'intentional objects' of Thomism do not have
the same status as the 'representations' of classical modern philosophy
(or Husserlian phenomenology). The error, which Cajetan (1468-1534)
rather prejudicially attributed to Duns Scotus, is to reduce the represen-
tative processes to a material relation whereby the mind, conceived of as
a container or entity, would receive into its inferiority through a process
of absorption or digestion ('abstraction'), copies or phantoms of things.
In the Thomist theory, the knower and the known become one in the
same act, a 'union without confusion.' The intelligence transforms itself
into the intelligibility of that which is to be known without thereby los-
ing its own identity. This is the 'mystery' of consciousness (Solere 1989,
18).10 The intellect actualizes the prospective intelligibility of the
known. The active union is between the intellect in act and the intelligi-
ble in act. For the scholastics there was a dynamic quality in the concept
of intentionality, a capacity of tension or stretching towards another.
This intentio is the Latin rendition of the Arabic terms ' ma' qul,' Al-
Farabi's translation of the Greek noema, and 'ma' na, 'Avicenna's (980-
1037)11 term for what is before the mind in thought. In fact, the term
intentio became current in scholastic philosophy after the translation
into Latin of Avicenna's works and commentaries on Aristotle. The start-
ing point for Aquinas was Aristotle's theory of thought and perception
in which cognition was explained in terms of the reception of forms into
the soul. The form in the soul (ma'na) was simply a meaning, or a cogni-
tion, or an intention of the same form in reality. For Aristotle, the soul
(or mind) takes on the form of the thing perceived without receiving its
matter. When I think about or perceive a horse, my mind receives the
form of the horse. Aquinas develops Aristotle's account, arguing that
the horse has a different existence in nature (esse naturale) and in
thought (esse intentionale).
That which is known acts on the intellect in an 'intentional' way with-
out modifying it entitatively (the scholastic adage: 'When I look at a
stone I do not become a stone'). The received form remains distinct
and objective. It exists for the knower not subjectively but intention-
ally. This intentional or objective existence is neither in the thing as a
physically existent subject, nor in the knowing subject; it is strictly
suprasubjective (and with language, as we shall see, potentially intersub-
jective).
How does this action of the known on the knower occur? Again we
start with the 'canonical' Thomist account and move towards Poinsot's

Poinsot and Deely on Relations and Signs 45
semiotic transposition. This requires some understanding of the scho-
lastic term species (pronounced spay-chee-ehs).12 Deely (1994a, 8) argues
compellingly that this is 'one of the least understood and yet philosoph-
ically richest aspects of Latin philosophy, namely the doctrine of "species"
or forms as specificative within cognition.'
Modern western philosophy (particularly from Descartes onwards)
chooses to dispense with the doctrine and embrace the aporias of a
'classical' metaphysics of representation in which what the mind knows
directly is its own products, positing a beneficent God to make our
'objective' ideas conform to the world.13
The Doctrine of 'Species'
Species come in two kinds: impressae and expressae. What do they do? They
are posited as the medium of intentionality whereby the knower knows
the known - 'a synergy of intellect and sensible reality' (Spruit 1994,
159). How do the species do this important job of producing/causing
cognitive experience of objects?
As Deely (1994a, 127) claims, 'the main sense of the epistemological
Latin term species, namely, the sense of giving specification or specifying
form, is one that has never been really brought out in modern English
discussions or translations of relevant Latin texts prior to the 1985 edi-
tion of Poinsot's Treatise on Signs.' The basic argument is that both expe-
rience and analysis of sensation and perception indicate that cognitive
organisms (e.g., human beings) are in some way determined or speci-
fied to apprehend something in particular rather than something else,
or nothing at all. To perceive a material object is to be in a certain kind
of perceptual state as a causal result of the action of that object; thus
there is a distinction between 'phenomenal' object (in scholasticism,
'objected object or objective being') and physical object. The distinc-
tions among all the schools of interpretation depend on the ontological
status of the being of the object-as-known: 'Species are, as it were, the
abutments upon which an analysis of the given leans for support, the
reality of which the mind, by that very analysis, is compelled to recog-
nize - with certainty, if the analysis itself has proceeded correctly
and under the constant pressure of intelligible necessities. Some deter-
mination must, of necessity, actually supervene upon the knower ...
The species is nothing but that internal determination (Maritain 1959,
115-16).

46 The Primacy of Semiosis
The species impressae are the means whereby a given physical entity
affects its surroundings by way of some specific energy (light, heat,
sound, movement, shape) such that a cognitive organism becomes
aware of something. Thus there is some 'impression' or specification on
the sensory powers, such that there is an actual sensation or cognitive
stimulus. There is an interaction or collusion between a cognitive power
(such as sight or hearing) and a stimulus generated by some environ-
mental factor. Deely gives the example of the pits of a CD, which specify
what kind of output will occur (music, images, text): 'The physical being
of the grooves is one thing, that which is specified by them quite
another: intentionality lies in the specifying - not as such ... but in what
it enables' (Deely 1994b, 271).
Beuchot (1994) gives the following account: In experience we notice
that the external senses 'sense' in the actual presence of their objects.
For example, the relative distance of an object determines whether it is
clearly or poorly perceived. This suggests that the senses are stimulated
with greater or lesser intensity by something emitted by the object (the
'species'). The experience of a mirror's reflection of an object that is
behind us also suggests that, besides the object, there is something (the
species) that causes the reflection in the mirror and allows us to see
something that is behind us. Rational analysis suggests that the senses
must be specified in some way so as to be aware of a particular object,
and this occurs through the object giving something of itself, a form of
specification. The species impressae unite the object with the external
senses.14
Let us now return to Deely's exposition of the 'Semiotic and Scholas-
tic Doctrine of Species' (1994a, 123-143). Deely's account is the most
succinct that I am aware of in the literature and has the added merit of
clarifying how Poinsot accommodated the doctrine of species to a doc-
trine of signs. What follows is a paraphrase or 'free rendering' of Deely's
account.15
Ideas
Deely begins by referring us to the introduction (§8) to Locke's An Essay
Concerning Human Understanding (1690), where Locke seeks to clarify
what he means by the word 'Idea': T must here in the Entrance beg par-
don of my Reader, for the frequent use of the Word Idea, which he will
find in the following Treatise. It being that Term, which, I think, serves

Poinsot and Deely on Relations and Signs 47
best to stand for whatsoever is the Object of the Understanding when a
Man thinks, I have used it to express whatever is meant by Phantasm,
Notion, Species, or whatever it is which the mind can be employ'd about
in thinking.'
The problem here is that Locke is providing a single term in place of
many other Latin terms that contain important distinctions - in particu-
lar, the distinction between repraesentatio (representation) and species.
Deely (1994a, 126) argues that Locke is using the term 'Idea' as a repre-
sentation whose cognitive function is to make 'present within awareness
objects regardless of their proximity within the environment. This is the
main function of the idea that Locke had in mind, as also Descartes, and
it is perhaps not too much to say that this is the principal notion of idea
throughout the period of modern philosophy.' However, unless we have
an understanding of the distinction between representation and species
(or representation and signification), we cannot understand the differ-
ence between a metaphysics of representation ('the way of ideas') and a
semiotic ('the way of signs').
Deely continues his exposition by giving an account of the doctrine of
species impressae and species expressae. He emphasizes, as we have already
noted, that the primary sense of the term species lies in giving specification
or specifying form. In Poinsot's late Thomist synthesis, sensory impressions
are 'bi-relative' qualities that require a collusion or interaction between
the stimulus of a physical object and a particular sensory power. This
analysis distinguishes itself both from a naive realism, such as that found
in Ockham's school wherein sense qualities inhere in the object (the
knower contributes nothing), and from the position of Suarez, wherein
the sense qualities are images formed by the mind and it is these images
which are directly known (Suarez would be the main scholastic influ-
ence on Descartes and Kant). Or, in other words, for Suarez, we have
only our 'representations,' which already exist at the level of sensation.
Deely argues that Poinsot's analysis enables us fully to understand the
doctrine of the species as specifying and whether or not this specification
of the cognitive powers constitutes an 'idea' in Locke's sense (i.e., a rep-
resentative image). This is the distinction between species impressae and
species expressae (or, as Deely also renders these terms, between 'cognitive
stimulus as such, and cognitive response').
Deely continues by noting that in Poinsot's tradition the most impor-
tant reason for positing the existence of ideas (beyond their function of
bringing objects into awareness that are not physically present) is to

48 The Primacy of Semiosis
allow for the proportion between the 'bare impressions of sense,' which
are given directly in experience, and 'objects' as we experience them.
We do not just have sense impressions, we perceive objects: a police-
man's uniform, a car crashing. This proportioning of sense into experi-
enced objects of awareness is the function of 'ideas.'
The distinction between species impressae and species expressae (im-
pressed and expressed, stimulus and response) lies in this distinction
between bare sensation on one side, and perception or conception on
the other. At the level of sensation (analytically distinguished within
experience from perception and conception) there are no 'ideas.' Sen-
sation consists in the interactions among things that actually exist in the
physical environment and are actually affecting the external senses 'here
and now.' At this level of bare sensation there is a proportion between
sensory powers and environmental influence - the power of hearing or
sight is proportioned to a specific range of stimulus beyond which noth-
ing is experienced (this proportionality varies among cognitive organ-
isms) . An actual sensation, as we noted earlier, occurs when a specific
sensory power is specified by some stimulus, the sensation being a relative
being arising in the interaction between sensory stimulus and sensory
power. Thus, to respond to the well known question 'Does a falling tree
that no one hears make a noise? According to Poinsot, the answer is no.
The species impressaeis not an idea in the sense of a representation. It is
a theoretical term of analysis for the act of causal specification whereby an
actual sensation occurs. The species does not appear, but is rather that
by which some physical environmental influence could be known. When
something does appear in perception, it will be the environmental
object, not the theoretically posited act of specification. I do not see (to
use vision as one example!) the interaction and specification arising
between the thing and the sensory power; rather, I see the thing as an
object of awareness. As Deely notes, this epistemological theory is based
on a sexual analogy: 'The species is a seminal form, the sensory power a
maternal womb. The power inseminated gives birth to the object appre-
hended.' What distinguishes Poinsot's position is that the object appre-
hended only arises in the interaction between the physical thing and the
senses. This distinguishes Poinsot's position from that of Ockham and
Suarez. The species impressae is an explanatory causal principle or mecha-
nism to account for the way in which the external senses are specified to
sense something. The species impressae is not an image or idea, in that it
does not make physically absent or inexistent things present in aware-
ness; it itself arises within an analysis of cognition that seeks to explain

Poinsot and Deely on Relations and Signs 49
how aspects of the environment come to be known. This analysis is based
on a distinction made in experience between sensation on one side and
perception and understanding on the other.
Species expressae (still not quite the Lockian 'ideas') arise as an element
of the analysis of cognition that seeks to explain how a given sensation
becomes a sensation of something - a sensation o/an object of percep-
tion. As Deely argues, the species expressae (or ideas) arise at the interface
between sensation and response:LLKLKKLJKKKHJKJJKKKKKHJKKJJJJKKJKKLJ
the organism to the cognitive experience of a stimulus.' The species is
now 'expressed' rather than 'impressed.' That noise that is now ex-
pressed in my awareness is o/my baby crying. It is no longer a specifying
factor of the external environment acting on my senses that would
enable me to become aware of something - I am now actually aware
of something that has a manner of being over and above that of a bare
sensation. The sensation has become incorporated into an 'object'
of awareness, it has been 'objected' such that it is no longer merely a
sensation at the level of physical interaction (e.g., sound waves in-
teracting with the ear) but an object of perception and, perchance,
understanding.
Deely notes that the species expressa 'was also called a concept, concep-
tus, because it is born or brought forth within the mind precisely as the
mind is fecundated or specified through the action of a species impressa,
as we have seen.' Objects of awareness are brought forth by the concept
and exist independently of physical interactions (thus, a purely physical
interaction will never make one aware of a national 'flag'; and reading
this text with any understanding requires more than a physical interac-
tion). Objects of awareness may be the things of a prejacent physical
environment, but they may also be incorporeal or fictional beings. How-
ever, the critical point for a semiotic analysis is that the concept and its
object differ in the same way as that which represents differs from that
which is represented. This brings us back to the scholastic terminology
of formal sign introduced at the beginning of this chapter and to Poin-
sot's development of an ontology of relations into a doctrine of signs.
Formal Signs
As we have noted, although it is uncertain exactly when this terminology
arose, by the fourteenth century the division of signs into instrumental
and formal had already been established. In opposition to Augustine's
definition of the sign as something sense-perceptible, something that on

50 The Primacy of Semiosis
being perceived brought something else into awareness, formal signs are
posited to account for the function of 'ideas' or 'concepts' as being, not
sense-perceptible, but rather factors which nevertheless bring into
awareness something other than themselves, something suprasubjective.
I am aware not of the idea or concept but rather of that which it repre-
sents - its object. The concept is a formal sign that disappears before its
object. The formal sign (concept) is a pure relation, not something that
would first be known. As the Latins said, the concept as a formal sign is
that by which - or rather, that on the basis of which - we know (id in quo};
it is not that which we know (id quod). So, the contrast: the species impressa
is that 'by which' (id quo) we are determined (or 'specified') so as to
become aware of this rather than that environmental aspect; the species
expressa (id in quo) is that 'on the basis of which' the environmental stim-
ulus is experienced as an object; while in both cases the object itself (id
quod) is distinct from the species, just as a terminus is distinct from the
foundation of a relation. We will come to see that the species expressae is
functioning as a Peircian interpretant,1^ 'the proper significate outcome'
(which need not be an interpreter or mental idea) in the triadic relation that a
sign consists in (sign-vehicle, object, interpretant). However, before elab-
orating on the interpretant and Deely's remarkable synthesis of Poinsot
and Peirce (which Guattari perhaps would have appreciated), I want to
offer a few more observations concerning the earlier Thomist and Sco-
tist approaches to the question of concepts and signs in order to clarify
the important notion of objective being. In fact, clarifying this notion is
central to a semiotic approach to cognition and experience.
As we have seen, the critical factor in Thomist and Scotist theories of
cognition is the relation between knower and known. The term 'objec-
tive being' appears to have arisen in the fourteenth-century debate
about the nature of the species. Scotus used the term as a qualification of
the more general expression 'esse intelligible,' already used by Thomas.
Now in the Thomist/Poinsot synthesis, as we have briefly noted, the con-
cept is understood as a formal sign whose entire function as a sign is to
refer to something other than itself before it would, itself, be known by a
reflexive act. For traditional Thomism, 'objective being,' 'objective real-
ity,' or 'being-an-object' indicated the status of something 'as known' in
relation to a knower. Something was 'objective' to the extent that it was
felt or known. Any 'thing' is 'objective' to the extent that it is known,
whereas unknown the thing rests in its subjectivity. This is not the mod-
ern sense of objectivity, as reality in binary opposition to subjectivity. In
the scholastic tradition there are 'subjects' considered in themselves -

Poinsot and Deely on Relations and Signs 51
that is, apart from being known (whether people or things). These sub-
jects may become 'objects' of an act of perception. With the modern
shift from ontology to epistemology (typified by Descartes), 'subjective'
has come to mean the perception of a 'psychological subject,' and
'objective' to mean the formal object of perception 'in itself.' Thus the
meaning of the terms has been reversed. In fact, Descartes17 applied the
notion of 'objective being' by placing it within the idea, such that objec-
tive being became a reflection or representation of the thing in the
mind (and it was this reflection that was directly known as an object),
whereas for the Thomists the 'objective reality of the thing in the mind'
signified a relation or interface that united them. The mind was not a
container that held things 'inside' itself. Objective being was not an
obstacle or 'third thing' positioning itself between the mind and the
thing, like a screen.18 Modern philosophy began once the idea came to
be considered the immediate object of knowledge rather than an inter-
face, or relation, or formal sign (which is the same thing). However,
although this modern position is traditionally associated with Descartes,
its innocent germ can be found in a particular understanding of the
Scotist theory of objective being. This makes the black hole of medieval
philosophy incredibly complex, because Poinsot treaded a tightrope between
Scotism and canonical realist Thomism19 by allowing for a semiotic repre-
sentational theory based on the ontological particularity of relations not
as being inherent accidents of substances but rather as having a supra-
subjective and potentially 'intersubjective' being. Poinsot sought to con-
serve the possibility of an adequate 'correspondence' or coherence
between thought and thing, but he also laid the semiotic foundation for
an image of thought that could not be reduced to this perspective. Rela-
tions are truly between things: rhizomes or interbeings, to use Deleuze and
Guattari's terms, or the 'Being of the Between,' to use Heidegger's char-
acterization of Dasein.20
Scotist and Thomist Accounts
Does Scotism differ from Thomism in its treatment of cognition and
signs? Responding to this question, even briefly, is a demanding but valu-
able exercise, as it will highlight the particularity of Poinsot's synthesis:
This last source [the work of Poinsot] is particulary interesting. It purifies
the philosophy that assumes the Thomist synthesis, in showing the purely
Aristotelian origins and in opposing the deformations to which Thomism

52 The Primacy of Semiosis
was subjected by Nominalist theologians, from Duns Scotus to Suarez.
Thus, in a work published in Spain, during the 17th century, between 1631
and 1635, the historian discovers the Thomist refutation of the main meta-
physical and critical theses that constitute the foundation of modern phi-
losophy. Muralt 1985, quoted in Beuchot (1994, 295)21
One difference between Scotism and Thomism might be this: Scotus
treated the concept like an instrumental sign, whereas Thomism treated
the concept as a formal sign. Eric Alliez makes this observation in Capi-
tal Times: Tales from the Conquest of Time (1996, 211).22 In a section titled
'1300: The Capture of Being,' he takes up Duns Scotus' doctrine of the
univocity of being (as indifferent to the finite and the infinite) and his
account of cognition. Alliez argues that Scotus broke with the idea of
an intentional identity between subject and object and gave priority to
the 'autonomy of the intelligible order' (ibid., 208). The intellect is
endowed with a power of production independently of the sensory
realm. Alliez contends that Duns Scotus was not trying to grant the intel-
lect complete independence, but was attempting to 'substitute an a-pri-
ori order of cognition for its formal-sensible definition (in Thomism).'
According to Alliez, this produced the modern conception of the
object. For Scotus - and for Descartes, and for modernity - the being of
the object of thought (its 'objective being) is no longer defined on the
basis of things but as a concept, as a representation in the intellect that
apprehends it. Objective being has become a 'distinct' entity in thought
rather than a set of pure relations. From now on, objective being in
thought is known before the thing is known. The objective being in thought
is separated from the thing. Objective being is what is distinctly repre-
sented in the mind; it is not the thing itself. Direct relation to an inde-
pendent reality has been elided, because knowledge now only bears on
the intellect, the 'cogitatum of the cogito' (Husserl). As Muralt (1991,
45) notes, this particular doctrine of objective being 'is triumphant
from Scotus to Frege.' The mind, having been freed from the sensible,
concrete object, and 'eliding' intentionality, begins to privilege the esse
objectivum as constituted by the mind itself (a subjective a priori). As
Alliez (1996, 211) argues: 'This is where the Scotist enterprise masters
the primary sense of the esse objectivum: that something presents itself as
an object of cognition: which it represents in the sense of establishing a
logic of the "instrumental sign."'23
In a footnote to this claim, Alliez refers us to Maritain's Distinguish to
Unite (1959) as cited by Solere (1989), where Maritain (an ultimately

Poinsot and Deely on Relations and Signs 53
'cyclopean,' realist Thomist), clearly inspired by his knowledge of Poin-
sot, argues that for Thomism the species expressa, or concept, is a formal
sign rather than an instrumental sign. In fact, such a distinction is based
on Maritain's reading of Poinsot; earlier Thomists would have tended to
express the matter in terms of intentionality. As Maritain's work is
largely forgotten in the contemporary Anglo-American academy, I will
quote the passage in its entirety (1959, 119-20):
Thomists distinguish between two kinds of essentially different signs: what
they call instrumental sign, and what they call formal sign. An instrumental
sign is anything that being itself first known [i.e. as sense-perceptible]
makes some other thing known consecutively: a streak of smoke we see ris-
ing into the sky, a portrait painted on canvas that we see in a gallery - both
are the objects upon which our knowledge first bears, only to pass from
thence to other objects that are known thanks to them - to the fire of
which the smoke is the effect, to the sitter of whom the image is the por-
trait and sign.
A formal sign is a sign whose whole essence is to signify. It is not an
object which, having, first, its proper value for us as an object, is found,
besides, to signify another object. Rather it is anything that makes known,
before being itself a known object. More exactly, let us say it is something
that, before being known as object by a reflexive act, is known only by the
very knowledge that brings the mind to the object through its mediation.
In other words, it is not by 'appearing' as object but by 'disappearing' in
face of the object, for its very essence is to bear the mind to something
other than itself.
Maritain specifically distinguishes this Thomist view from 'various
scholastic deviations' such as 'the Scotist notion of esse objectivum' in
which the concept is claimed to be an instrumental sign, an image, or a
portrait of the thing in us, a closed world, rather than a 'living relation.'
According to Maritain, the Scotist position sowed the seeds that led to
modern idealism, be it that of Berkeley or Hume - behind this idea-thing
there is nothing- or the Kantian 'solution' - behind this idea-thing there is
something, but we can know nothing of it.24
Muralt (1991) presents a similar argument concerning the idealist
element in the Scotist esse objectivum and shows that it was Poinsot who,
with his doctrine of the formal sign, provided the most original attempt
to combat the notion of an entitative immanence of the species in the
mind. Nevertheless, he also claims that Poinsot's doctrine of signs has a

54 The Primacy of Semiosis
Scotist influence, and this is relevant to Deely's interpretation of objec-
tive being. We need to be careful of the extreme reactions against Sco-
tism by orthodox Aristotelian Thomists. Poinsot, with his semiotic
subalternation of 'moderate realism,' goes beyond canonical realist
Thomism while seeking to conserve its essential elements by establish-
ing through sign relations the possible correspondence between the
objects of experience and the things of a physical environment.
As Muralt (1991, 95) notes, the early Thomist term 'intentional
being' suggests that the immanent presence of a species ensures that a
cognitive power is led to its object. This can suggest two objects: the
intentional being as a representation of a 'real' object. But this imma-
nence is not an entitative existence 'in' a physical subject. It is a supra-
subjective ontological relation. For Muralt (ibid., 97),25 it was Poinsot
who achieved the most sophisticated interpretation with his doctrine of
the species expressa as a formal sign. The time has now come to present
Poinsot's terse prose as translated by Deely. The most relevant passages
that Maritain and Muralt refer to are from Book II of TDS - specifically,
in 'Question 2: Whether the Concept is a Formal Sign':
First Conclusion. A concept or specifying form expressed by the under-
standing is most properly a formal sign ... And the foundation of the con-
clusion is taken from the fact that an intelligible concept directly
represents another than itself to the cognitive power, as, for example, a
man or a stone, because it is a natural similitude of those things, and
through its information the concept renders the understanding knowing
in act by a cognition terminated by the cognition of [the man or the stone] itself,
and not from a preexisting cognition of [a representation of the man or the
stone] itself. (TDS, 247/11-21)
A concept is not said to represent as something first known in the mode
of an extrinsic object, so that the qualification 'known' would be an extrin-
sic denomination; a concept is said to represent as something intrinsic
known, that is, as the terminus of the knowledge within the power. But
because it is not the terminus in which the cognition finally stops, but one by
whose mediation the power is borne to the knowing of an outside object...
And so, by the essentially same cognition, concept and thing conceived are
attained, but the cognition of the thing is not arrived at from the cognition
of the concept. (TDS, 250/7-39)
For now (the details will slowly emerge), let us note that in TDS, Poin-
sot is distinguising between representation and signification. The concept

Poinsot and Deely on Relations and Signs 55
represents - that is, it brings into awareness something other than itself.
The concept, treated in its capacity as a sign, founds a 'relation to
another,' and it is that 'other' that is directly known. Signs are not
objects; they disappear before their objects (which objects may also
become signs). The concept (as an object of awareness) is actually
'known' through a reflexive turn. This semiotic avoids the aporias of
representational idealism and frees the mind from closed interiority.
Now does Duns Scotus really turn concepts into instrumental signs, as
Alliez claims, influenced by a reading of traditional Thomist criticism?
And is Scotus so far from Poinsot's synthesis? Following Muralt's analysis
(1991, 108-10), it would seem that Poinsot's and Scotus' semiotics con-
cur more than they differ. Both have a representative theory that distin-
guishes between representation and signification. Muralt claims that for
Scotus, the object represented by the species expressae is both an absolute
term, since the act of intellection terminates there; and an intentional term
(a sign relation), since it is the representative being in intrinsic denomi-
nation of the object in itself in its proper existence as cognized or
known. There is a formal identity and correspondence between objec-
tive being and real being (esse reale} that is analogous to canonical
Thomism's intentional union of knower and known in act. It is also very
close to Poinsot's semiotic as presented in the above extract from TDS.
Muralt (ibid., 151) also notes an equivalence between Gregory of
Rimini's doctrine of the complexe significabile^JJKKKKKKKJKJJHJJHJJKKL
LS and DR) and Poinsot's distinction between enunciative and judica-
tive propositions, which I will not discuss here.
Before returning to Deely's development of Poinsot's semiotic, I want
to mention one other account of Duns Scotus' theory of signification -
one that shows it is an error to dismiss Duns Scotus in the way that tradi-
tional Thomists (including Maritain) have done. Scotus' approach to
signification is compatible with that of Poinsot, although less developed.
Poinsot had the advantage of writing more than three hundred years
later, at a time when theories of signification were being widely dis-
cussed; and he provided in TDS the first thematic treatment of signs as
having a general and univocal being as ontological relations over and
above the status of their foundations as instrumental or formal. Further-
more, Peirce was strongly influenced by Scotus, and Deely's own work
involves a fascinating synthesis of Poinsot, Peirce, and Scotus without
being reducible to these sources.
Dominik Perler, in his valuable essay 'Duns Scotus on Signification'
(1993), engages with the controversy that occupied Scotus' contemporar-

56 The Primacy of Semiosis
ies: Does a spoken word signify a concept or a thing? Perler quotes Scotus:
Tn short, I grant that what is properly signified is a thing.' This was a revi-
sion of the then dominant doctrine that a word signified a concept. Sco-
tus argued, following Thomism, that an expressed species, or concept, is
necessary for understanding or signifying. He distinguished between the
ontological status of the species and its function: the species can be under-
stood as an accident affecting the soul, and as a sign signifying the thing.
Scotus argued that the function of the species as a sign was to direct the
intellect to something other than itself (the same applied to the spoken
word). He distinguished between the concept or species as the immediate
significate o£ a word, and the thing as its mediate significate. As Perler (1993,
104) notes: The distinction of two significates enables Scotus to say that
by uttering a word we speak about the thing itself, and not merely about
our intelligible species of the thing, although it is the intelligible species
that is immediately signified.' In the same way as Thomism, Scotus
argued that the intelligible species was only through a reflexive second
intention a significate in itself, or an object of awareness.
Duns Scotus also replied to the objection that we do not always use a
word to signify an extra-mental, existing physical thing, in the following
way: The thing is signified not as it exists but insofar as it is an object of
the intellect - insofar as it is known or understood, that is, as a concept.
This is Duns Scotus' objective being. Now is this 'thing as it is under-
stood' the intelligible or expressed species? Perler notes that Scotus
does not give a detailed answer to this question, but offers the following
account based on his distinction between existence and essence: There
is a 'formal' distinction between existence and essence, and 'the thing
as understood' is the essence of the thing. This essence, although not sep-
arable from the thing, is formally distinct, without being a real distinc-
tion or distinction of reason.27 The essence is not produced by the
intellect; rather, it is a potency or prospective intelligibility that is known
by thought, but not dependent on it.
Perler concludes by noting that Scotus claims that a spoken word
directly signifies the essence of a thing (the thing as understood) byway
of a metaphysical distinction (between essence and existence). This is
because Scotus 'wants to preserve an immediate relationship between
language and reality and the possibility to signify non-existing things.'
Three hundred years later, Poinsot would give a more accessible and
semiotically satisfying account of the same problematic based on the
particular ontology of relations as univocal and indifferent to the mind-
dependent/mind-independent 
distinction. Furthermore, the distinc-

Poinsot and Deely on Relations and Signs 57
tion between formal and instrumental signs becomes derivative (as does
intentionality) from an analysis of relative being as either transcenden-
tal or ontological. There are relative beings (or subjectivities/sub-
stances) and there are the ontological ('external') relations they are
involved in. Signs as univocal ontological relations can refer to existent
or non-existent objects with equal facility, and our 'objective' experi-
ence, being a semiotic web of objective sign relations, is an admixture of
both. Semiosis does not require the physical existence of the object of
awareness. It can be 'purely' objective (such as a dead relative, or a
purely fictional being). Experience is a pattern of inherently impercep-
tible, univocal, objective relations (i.e., relations as understood in aware-
ness) that exhibits the so-called 'essencesLLKJKJJJKKHJHJHJHJJJUJDJSJSK
are considered real or fictional, or no longer existent, or yet to appear.
Scientific practice is based on the critical control of this permeable
'objectivity' in seeking to determine (with more or less success) whether
these relations of experience coincide with the actual relations that sus-
tain and realize the existence or becoming of a presumed mind-inde-
pendent 'thing' (e.g., a neutrino). To become is to be in relation - only
as a logical abstraction could there be a non-relative empty structure of
being, 'by-itself.' To understand a being is to understand the field of
relations that sustains it in its being-in-a-world:
Human understanding must account first of all and in the final analysis for
the objectively real, not just for the physically real, and not just for what the
prejudices of a given time label as 'real.' 'Reality' is not the physically given,
it is the semiosic total of which physical being forms a part. The Mississipi
River physically is not the boundary between Iowa and Illinois, but it is so
objectively [as known]. Ronald Reagan physically is not President of the
United States, but he is so objectively. (Deely 1986b, 270).
This is objective being - which, also intersects with the the concept of
the 'truth of the relative,' to use Deleuze and Guattari's term (WIP,
130). The 'Truth of the relative' is not a relativism but a 'constructiv-
ism'; it is neither idealist nor realist.
Objective Being as Umzvelt
In order to make the notion of objective being more concrete, let us
now turn to Jacob von UexkuH's concept of Umwelt or 'species-specific

58 The Primacy of Semiosis
objective world.' Deely (1986b, 267-8) writes:
Deeply rooted in Classical German Philosophy - that is to say, Kant - von
Uexkiill had a lively sense of the role of mental construction in our experi-
ence of any 'reality.' But, unlike Kant and fortunately for us, von Uexkiill
was a remarkably attentive observer of the world of plants and other than
human animals. Out of these two preoccupations von Uexkiill forged some
of the most remarkable and semiotically fruitful notions available to us for
understanding the phenomenon of semiosis.
So let us now take a stroll with von Uexkiill through the worlds of ani-
mals and men.

4 Umwelten
It would be foolish if we attempted to impute or ascribe philosophical inade-
quacy to Uexkull's interpretations, instead of recognizing the engagement with
concrete investigations like this is one of the most fruitful things that philosophy
can learn from contemporary biology.
Heidegger (1995, 263)
Uexkiill, one of the main founders of ethology, is a Spinozist when first he
defines the melodic lines or contrapuntal relations that correspond to each
thing, and then he describes a symphony as an immanent higher unity that takes
on a breadth and fullness ('natural composition').
Deleuze (1988a, 126)
What busy inquirers into verbal semantics - linguists, logicians — have probed
and profited from Uexkull's masterful Bedeutungslehre?1
Sebeok (1976, x)
Jakob von Uexkiill and Umwelten
To understand who von Uexkiill was and what Umwelten are and their
relevance for semiotics, I first introduce von Uexkiill's work and then
move on to its interpretation by Deely. This involves the not unfamiliar
manoeuvre of creeping up behind a thinker and producing something
new and interesting that both retains essential elements of his thought
and places it in an entirely different framework. Here it will be the shift
from von Uexkiill's understandably German idealism/constructivism
('All reality is subjective appearance'; von Uexkiill 1926, xv) towards a

60 The Primacy of Semiosis
semiotic 'constructivism' that is objective, but not as the binary opposite
of subjective in the classical modern sense. Objectives the semiotic sense
(with its roots in Dans Scotus and Poinsot) can include aspects of the
physical and psychical in a labile interface but remains irreducible to
either category (just like being-as-first-known). This requires a certain
mental agility for even the most subtly agile critical thinker. A paradigm
shift into a jfawftnodernism worth the name - at least that is Deely's chal-
lenge. Whether we retain the term postmodern or opt for Latour's
(1999a, 21) nonmoderr? matters little. Whatever the term, it will indicate
something different from modernism and current accounts of 'postmod-
ernism.'
I will also seek to elaborate the critical distinction between the animal
and human Umwelten — or species-specific objective worlds as Deely pre-
sents it. This distinction is timely, because although it has similarities
with Heidegger's treatment of exactly the same question, I will claim
that Deely provides a more articulate and nuanced analysis. Those who
are shocked by and criticize Heidegger's 'abyss' between man and ani-
mal (e.g., Krell 1992; Derrida 1989, 1991) might find this approach of
value, even if only to distinguish themselves from it. The ultimate issue
is this: To what extent it can be said that a non-languaging, non-human
animal3 apprehends its Umwelt or milieu/environing world as a world at
all?4 Deely's distinction between zoosemiosis and anthroposemiosis
intersects with Wittgenstein's approach to forms of life and expressive
capacities that can only exist in language: 'We say a dog is afraid his mas-
ter will beat him; but not, he is afraid his master will beat him tomorrow.
Why not?' (Wittgenstein 1967, §650). What would be the expressive
behavioural manifestation of this fear about a future event? To what
extent is it intelligible to say that a tick feels pain, or has an opinion, or
lives in a 'world' at all? These distinctions might force themselves
between us and become interesting. The concept of objective being
introduced in the preceding chapter (i.e., as something existing only
insofar as it exists within awareness) will be seen as providing the rela-
tional network for the fabrication of species-specific objective worlds or
Umwelten. Deely (1986b, 269) writes:
If we now translate Umwelt as objective world, we are also in a fair position to
see the significance of this notion for the understanding of semiosis as a
unique process in nature. An Umwelt, von Uexkiill tells us, is the physical
environment as filtered or transformed by the given organism according to
what is important or 'significant' to it. Elements of the physical environ-

Umwelten 
61
ment are networked objectively, i.e., so as to establish the sphere of experi-
ence as something superordinate to and strictly transcending, all the while
containing partially and resting upon aspects of, the physical environment
in its 'natural' or 'mind-independent' being. Umwelten are thus species-spe-
cific: No two types of organisms live in the same objective worlds, even
though they share the same physical environment. What the bat seeks
(nourishment) the moth avoids (providing nourishment for bats), and
conversely.
Von Uexkiill is better known today than in 1976, when Sebeok asked
who had benefited from his Bedeutungslehre (theory of meaning). In
fact, Deely (1990, 120) once characterized von Uexkiill as 'one of the
greatest cryptosemioticians of the century.' What did von Uexkiill do
to attract the attention of Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, Deleuze and
Guattari, and (especially) contemporary semioticians (e.g., Sebeok,
Deely) and biosemioticians and biologists (e.g., Hoffmeyer, Maturana,
Bateson)?
I will rely principally on Jakob von Uexkiill's son, Thure, for a prepa-
ratory account of his father's work. Specifically, I will be summoning two
works by the son: his introduction to his father's Bedeutungslehre (1982),
and 'Jakob von Uexkiill's Umwelt Theory' (1989). Once I have presented
the father's essential notions, I will begin a shift to Deely's semiotic
interpretation, which liberates von Uexkiill from his own somewhat
counterproductive reliance on post-Kantian idealism (i.e., objects con-
form to cognition, never can cognition conform to objects - the closed
bubble of the representational sphere).5 Thure also appears to ulti-
mately rely on an orthodox Kantian perspective, although he realizes
that 'the epistemological premise of Jacob von Uexkiill's theory is nei-
ther objectivistic nor subjectivist but - as one would describe it today -
"systemic"' (or as we might also say, 'a semiotic reality').
Jakob Von Uexkiill was born in 1864 in Keblas, Estonia. He originally
studied zoology, and his later work was concerned with how living
beings perceive their environment. He originated a method of research
he called Umweltforschung (Umwelt studies) and in 1926 founded the
Institut fiir Umweltforschung at the University of Hamburg.6 As Deleuze
notes in our chapter epigram, von Uexkiill was one of the founders of
ethology. His primary interest was the role played by sign processes in
living organisms. His starting point was that living organisms respond to
signs rather than to causal impulses. Organisms are selective interpreters;
they are perceiving and acting subjects that do not respond to external

62 The Primacy of Semiosis
effects in a causal-mechanical way, but rather with specific, autonomous
responses.7 Von Uexkull gives the now philosophically notorious exam-
ple of the tick's activity to illustrate his Umwelt theory.8
The Tick as an Interpreter - The Functional Cycle
In his remarkable A Stroll through the Worlds of Animals and Men (1957),
von Uexkull assumes that anyone who lives in the country will know
what a tick is. But given that for many people this is not the case, let us
note that a tick is a small insect (Ixodinae), related to mites, that lives off
the warm blood of mammals. Paraphrasing von UexkiiU's account
(1957: 6-13), the life of the tick as interpreter unfoldsLLLLKKKKKKLLL
way:
The blind and deaf tick needs to eat, so it climbs to the end of some
twig or branch, where it may fall or be brushed off onto a passing mam-
mal. The tick climbs towards light because its skin is photo-sensitive. It
can detect an approaching mammal with its sense of smell (i.e, the
mammal has a specific odour caused by its sweat glands). When the tick
senses the odour (or sign) of the passing mammal, it drops (with luck)
onto it and latches on. The tick is sensitive to temperature and seeks out
a warm, hairless spot (e.g., an armpit), where it will pump itself full of
blood, becoming the size of a garden pea.
For von Uexkull, the point of this scenario is that 'what we are dealing
with is not with an exchange offerees between two objects, but the rela-
tions between a living subject and its object' (1957, 11). There are cer-
tainly physical and chemical stimuli, but to stop at this purely
physiological observation is to have missed something important! A tra-
ditional physiological account would describe the tick's behaviour as a
'reflex arc' elicited by physical and chemical stimuli (e.g., butyric acid,
temperature, tactile response). A reflex arc simply transmits, by way of
the activity of the nervous system, purely physical effects of motion
between sensory receptors and the muscles of the effectors. The entire
process involves a transfer of motion (like a mechanism) without any
interpretive or perceptual activity that cannot be reduced to purely
physical terms. Von Uexkull certainly recognizes physical or chemical
stimuli, but he also argues that this approach misses the point: 'We are
not concerned with the chemical stimulus of butyric acid, any more
than with the mechanical stimulus (released by the hairs), or the tem-
perature stimulus of the skin. We are concerned solely with the fact that,
out of the hundreds of stimuli radiating from the qualities of the mam-

Umwelten 
63
mal's body, only three become the bearers of receptor cues for the tick.
Why just these three and no others?' (ibid.)
The answer for von Uexkiill is that living organisms respond to per-
ceptual signs (Merkzeichen) or 'meaning' (Bedeutung)KLLLLLKKLKLKLL
impulses.10 Physical, chemical, or thermal changes to the receptor
organs are interpreted as signs of the (not yet perceptible) 'perceptual
cues' of an object, as a counterpart for a specific behaviour. Von Uexkiill
argues that the 'subject' (tick) and 'object' (mammal) dovetail into
each other and constitute a systematic whole or functional cycle. The
organism or interpreter receives signs from its environment, and these
perceptual signs trigger specific action impulses or operation signs
(Wirkzeicheri). The whole cycle is a process made not of static objects but
rather of sign relations - a semiosis. For example, with the tick there are
three functional cycles, which follow each other in processual succes-
sion: (1) The mammal's skin glands are the sites of perceptual meaning
in the first cycle: the butyric acid triggers perceptual signs in the tick
that induce the tick to let go of the twig and fall onto the passing mam-
mal. (2) The mammal's hair now produces perceptual signs that trigger
the tick to move around until a warm, bare patch of skin is found. (3)
The temperature of the mammal's bare skin triggers perceptual signs in
the tick that initiate the piercing process with the tick's proboscis.11
In this functional cycle the mammal (object) is a connecting link
between the tick's effectors and receptors, which metaphorically 'grasp'
the object like the two jaws of a pair of pincers. The 'perceptual jaw'
gives perceptual meaning to the object, and the 'operational jaw' gives
an effector meaning. For von Uexkiill there is a counterpoint or contra-
puntal relation between the organism as a 'meaning-utilizer' or interpret-
ant, and the perceptual cues or 'meaning-factors' of the object - Nature
as music.12 Living beings develop in a kind of natural contrapuntal 'har-
mony' or refrain, with one another and with their environment.13 Von
Uexkiill (J. 1982, 53) gives the example of the octopus, designated as the
subject in its relation to seawater as the meaning carrier. In this scenario, the
fact that water cannot be compressed is the precondition for the con-
struction of the octopus's muscular swim bag. The pumping movement
of the swim bag on the non-compressible water propels the animal back-
wards. Von Uexkiill claims that the rule that governs the properties of
seawater acts on the protoplasm of the octopus, thereby shaping the
melody of the development of the octopus form to express the proper-
ties of seawater. The rule of meaning that joins point and counterpoint is
expressed in the action of swimming- an energetic interpretant.

64 The Primacy of Semiosis
So the Umwelt is a model of a species' significant surroundings. The
essential claim is that organisms interpret their environment and are
not merely the passive objects of natural selection, as emphasized by
much contemporary Darwinian evolutionary biology. The Umwelt con-
sists of significant sign relationships. However, von Uexkull, in the pre-
vailing context of Kantian idealism, presented Umwelten as subjective
appearances or phenomena, and he thought of his Umwelt research as a
confirmation of a Kantian philosophy of mind:
All reality is subjective appearance. This must constitute the great, fundamen-
tal admission even of biology. It is utterly in vain to go seeking through the
world for causes that are independent of the subject; we always come up
against objects which owe their construction to the subject. When we admit
that objects are appearances that owe their construction to a subject, we
tread on firm and ancient ground, especially prepared by Kant to bear the
edifice of the whole of natural science. Kant set the subject, man, over
against objects, and discovered the fundamental principles according to
which objects are built up from the mind. (1926: xv)
Before examining the contemporary value and semiotic use of the
concept of Umwelt, freed from a needlessly unsemiotic Kantian philoso-
phy of mind, I will give a brief account of Deleuze and Guattari's appro-
priation of von Uexkull's work.
Deleuze and Guattari's Appropriation
The key is the concept of the univocity of being. In his 1974 Vincennes
seminar 'Anti Oedipe et mille plateaux,'14 Deleuze articulates von Uex-
kiill's work by moving from the concept of the univocity of being to a
Spinozist interpretation of von Uexkiill's nascent biosemiotics. For
Deleuze, Duns Scotus only thought univocal being, whereas Spinoza
affirms it with one Nature for all individuals,15 and von Uexkiill's Umwelt
theory is an expression of the univocity of being. How does this truly
creative and remarkable proposition work (not unlike Poinsot grasping
the formal sign as an ontological relation in 1632 - the year Spinoza was
born), and in what way might it be further articulated with the being of
ontological relations?
In the 1974 Vincennes seminar, Deleuze makes (as does this book) a
'terminological detour' through the Middle Ages and seventeenth cen-
tury (the philosophical black hole of the 'between times'). This trajec-

Umwelten 
65
tory is, in fact, obligatory, as one has to go back this far to rediscover
ontology and its relevance to an ontology of signs. For Deleuze, this
detour concerns the problem of the nature of being, which was dis-
cussed by the scholastic seminarians in terms of equivocity, analogy, and
univocity. He emphasizes that these scholastic discussions still have con-
crete relevance for us because we continue to think with these terms
even if we are not aware of them.
To state that 'being is equivocal' means that 'being is said in several
senses of that which it is said' (my italics). For example, being is said in a
different way of God, animals, and tables. They have different kinds of
being, and there is no common measure between these equivocal senses
of being.
To state that 'being is analogical' means that 'being is said in several
senses of that which it is said, but these senses are not without common measure:
they are governed by relations of analogy1 (my italics). This is the canonical
interpretation of Aquinas, and it is intimately linked to the concept of
the categories (e.g. substance, quantity, relation) and to the categorial
thinking of Aristotle and Kant. The categories are the concepts that are
said of every possible object of experience - in other words, the catego-
ries are that which is said of the different senses of the word 'being.'
Deleuze gives the example of the 'object' lion, which is not a category
because one cannot say 'lion' of every object of experience (one of
course can do this at the risk of being placed in a mental asylum). Thus
categorial thought is analogical because the categories are applied to
the different senses of the word 'being.'
Deleuze defines the univocity of being thus: univocal being ' has only
one sense and is said in one and the same sense of everything of which it is said1
(my italics). This is the thesis of Duns Scotus. Deleuze understands this
as a 'pre-categorial' and pre-analogical thought - '« mad thought1 (my
italics) - which will become an experimentation with relations as the
violent and repugnant 'hallucination point of thought.' How can we say
that God and ticks, trees and stones, imaginary worlds and impossible
objects (e.g., a square circle), have one sense, or univocal being?
Now it is possible at this point to sense that we are beginning to drown
in a set of sterile debates that have absolutely no relevance to our experi-
ence. I have no mastery of scholasticism nor of the history of philoso-
phy, but there is something interesting happening here that I would like
to focus on.16
Duns Scotus is not seeking to completely eliminate analogy from the
concept of being, but to show that it cannot be exclusively analogous. He

66 The Primacy of Semiosis
does not exclude analogy, but rather allows for its possibility. His funda-
mental point is that unless there is a univocal concept of being common
to the analogous ones, they will not be analogous but equivocal. In fact,
he affirms that although being is metaphysically or logically univocal, in
the order of entitative physical being it is analogical. Deleuze (Seminar,
14 January 1974) notes that without this distinction univocity would
become heresy and lead to unpleasant consequences at the stake: 'If I
say being is univocal, this means: there is no categorial difference
between the assumed senses of the word 'being' and being is said in one
and the same sense of everything which is. In a certain manner this
means that the tick is God; there is no difference of category, there is no
difference of substance, there is no difference of form. It becomes a
mad thought.' Scotus did not go this far; his motives were to safeguard
the possibility of our knowledge of God and to give metaphysics its
proper object in a univocal concept of being. He thought this would dis-
tinguish metaphysics (as a science of being qua being) from physics por-
trayed as concerned with the reality of singular physical existents (entia
realid).
Now Scotus argues, following Avicenna, that if being is univocal it fol-
lows that being is the primary object of the intellect, preceding any par-
ticular notion of being as applied to God or creatures (e.g., infinite or
finite - being-as-first-known is neither infinite nor finite). The intellect
or understanding has its own proper object or primum intelligibile, just as
sound is to hearing (primum audibile) or light to seeing (primum visibile).
The object of the intellect or understanding is ens primum cognitum,
being-as-first-known. Avicenna had made being the primary object of
the intellect, in contradistinction to either God or substance, the proper
subject of metaphysics. Scotus adopted this position with his own nu-
ances, which I will not attempt to pursue here.
Contemporary Value and Semiotic Use
So what? Deely will claim that Poinsot's conception of the coinciding
univocal being of relations in objective existence (i.e., as known),
whether mind-dependent or mind-independent (ontological relations
are truly relations and distinct or 'external' to their terms, whether pos-
ited as mind-dependent or mind-independent), is grounded in the
univocity of the primary object of the intellect, ens primum cognitum, as
understood by Avicenna. The ontological rationale of relation is univo-
cal, neither physical nor psychical, although capable of being either

Umwelten 
67
depending on the particular circumstances. Relations are transversal;
they can pass freely between what we consider mind-dependent and
mind-independent. Relations in their univocal being as 'objective' rela-
tions are neither 'real' nor 'ideal,' although at any given here and now
they will be one or the other - the ultimate abstract machine. For Deely
it is this univocity that allows for both semiosis (the action of signs) as
the being proper to experience and the consequent fluid intermixing of
'nature' and 'culture' in our experience as constituted through ontolog-
ical sign relations in anthroposemiosis - the human use of signs.
Of particular interest is that both Deleuze and Poinsot emphasize that
there is something about univocal being which is pre-categorial. As
Heidegger (1962, 23) puts it: the 'problem of the unity of Being as over
against the multiplicity of categories applied to things.' Poinsot's doc-
trine of signs is a more fundamental ontology in that the action of signs as
the medium of communication is presupposed by any system of catego-
ries and it is semiosis - the action of signs - that allows for the subse-
quent construction of categorial schemas. Traditional Aristotelian
natural philosophy was concerned with the structure of ens reale, or
mind-independent existence understood in terms of substances or units
of independent existence and their accidents or properties and charac-
teristics. Poinsot's genius was that he undercut this categorial approach
by showing that it is from within an expanded notion of experience that
being is divided up between the mind-dependent (ens rationis) and
mind-independent (ens reale) and that these two kinds of being come together
in the sign understood as an ontological relation. Poinsot realized that the
formal sign is an ontological relation, 'external' to its terms. It is existen-
tially inseparable from its foundation but nevertheless distinct from it. A
doctrine of signs or semiotic is not restricted to one side of the division -
it is as 'realist' as it is 'idealist.' We can genuinely encounter the mind-
independent existence of things (rather than simply affirm their exist-
ence, as in Kant's philosophy) because the ontology of the sign relation
is univocal. The ontological relation is neutral or indifferent to its real-
ization, whether in nature or thought. Ontological relation is contrasted
with the transcendental 'relation,' or rather the relativity of relative (i.e.,
finite) beings. A transcendental relation is not a relation, but rather the
fact that individual existents or subjects are not relations, but relative
beings. All being is 'relative,' but this relativity is twofold - transcendental
and ontological. That is to say, within experience we find that as soon as
we wish to explain or understand some individual existent we are
obliged to take account of what those individuals are not - namely, their

68 The Primacy of Semiosis
relations and dependencies on things other than themselves (their
ontological relations). For example: the eye or visual system is not a rela-
tion, but as soon as we wish to discourse about the eye we are forced by
its manner of being to consider its relation to light. I am not my mother,
but I am related to my mother - that relation is an ontological relation
'over and above' my transcendentally relative being, my being as an
individual being dependent on many factors other than my actual
instantiation.L
Poinsot's semiotic approach is pre-categorial because the sign 'as the
medium of communication functions by distinguishing connections within
experience, and so is not only presupposed to any system of categories,
but is also the instrument of their establishment' (Poinsot, 1985: TDS,
476). What needs to be emphasized is that the sign is univocal in its
being as an ontological relation and that this univocity is 'grounded' in
the univocity of being-as-first-known, the primary object of the under-
standing.
In other words: univocal, semiotic reality - the reality of experience -
is not reducible to the mind's own workings (e.g., as in the Kantian syn-
thesis) nor is it to that of a prejacent external physical world in which
the mind has no part. It is a limitless interface where the line between
what is and what is not, independent of interpretative activity, is a con-
stantly shifting semiotic process. As Deely observes so well in numerous
articles,1 what comes first in experience is neither ens reale nor ens ratio-
nis. It is in our experience that being divides into what is not indepen-
dent of understanding (ens rationis] and what is independent of my
understanding (ens reale}. Thus there is a 'prederivative' sense of being,
and this 'sense' of being, 'whatever it be, is prior to being in either of
the derived senses; and it is this prior being - the being proper to expe-
rience - that semiotic takes as its province' (Deely 1988b, 73). This pri-
ority of univocal being is not a linear temporality that would be left
behind; it is intrinsic to the possibility of being able to predicate any-
thing at all (e.g., 'what is that?'). Univocal being is a 'unique' or singular
notion, sui generis. As we have noted, Scotus is inspired by Avicenna in
his understanding of univocal being, as is Deleuze, who understands
'sense' in terms of Avicenna's univocity. For Deleuze it is the univocity of
sense that allows the escape from the circle of the proposition. We are
established 'from the outset' within sense as that which allows for the
articulation of the difference between things and propositions. Sense,
or univocity, is presupposed and is that which allows for the distinction
between the particular and the general. For Avicenna univocity is the

Umwelten 
69
third state of essence, essence as sense, the 'pure event,' indifferent to
all opposites.19 For Deely (1988a, 8), this Persian doctor and metaphysi-
cian (Ibn Sina) was a critically important and somewhat neglected fig-
ure: 'In fact, we are able to see in hindsight that what Avicenna had
given a name to was nothing less than the materia prima of anthro-
posemiosis. The primum cognitum of medieval thought turns out to be
precisely what the linguistic sign informs in enabling us through dis-
course to argue about what is and what is not in nature as about how
experience is and is not rightly to be interpreted in any given context of
discourse, including the metaphysical.'
Deely will argue (with some reference to Heidegger) that this appre-
hension of univocal being by the understanding or intellect is only avail-
able to animals operating in language (currently human animals),
because language entails the grasping of relations of signification as
such, rather than only perceptible aspects of things. Non-languaging
animals are aware of their surroundings and of relative beings but not of
the relations themselves, because relations themselves are not sense-percep-
tible. Univocal being requires an understanding of something that is not
perceptible and that can only be expressed through linguistic means. In
such an incorporeal scenario, this would be what differentiates human
animal communication from animal communication. We will inevitably
return to this 'problematic' proposition.
Let us recapitulate: There is a pre-categorial, 'pre-derivative' under-
standing of being (or sense) as univocal. It acts as the permeable,
osmotic interface or articulation between the orders of being and non-
being, or the mind-dependent and mind-independent as they are distin-
guished by experience. It allows for the communion between thought
and being. It is superior to any categorial standpoint in that it allows for
categorial interconnections by distinguishing connections or relations
within experience. Says Deely (1988b, 80): 'The thesis is that relation,
rather than substance or accident, is to serve as the basis for all semiotic
explanation, and that the ontological explanation in the traditional cat-
egories of substance and accident, to whatever extent it is valid, is subor-
dinate to the standpoint of semiotic by reason of being assimilable to
(and subsequently analytically derivable from) transcendental relation
and ontological relation generally.'
Thus, as Deely often observes, semiotic is 'an integral philosophy of
experience' that goes beyond both Aristotelian and Kantian categorial
thought. Aristotelian realist categories are concerned with nature as it is
supposed to exist independently of human thought. Kantian idealism

70 The Primacy of Semiosis
takes the opposite view, contending that the order of beings as existing
in themselves is forever hidden from human understanding. The Kan-
tian categories represent universal forms or structures that are presup-
posed to any judgments about the world of appearances or phenomena,
not to things in themselves. Deely argues throughout his work that
although Poinsot recognizes the inadequacy of the Aristotelian catego-
rial schema for the perspective of semiotic which understands experi-
ence as a product of sign relations, it is Peirce's semiotic categorial
scheme (Firstness, Secondness, Thirdness - which are three classes of
relations - monadic, dyadic, triadic) that begins to truly develop this
realization of the interpenetration within experience of a living tissue of
sign relations that does not preclude mind-independent elements from
experience. This interpenetration within experience of 'nature' and
'culture' is possible because of the univocal being of the ontological
sign relation (Peirce's thirdness as triadic relation), in which nature and
culture come together. Deely does indicate that in Hegel's Logic ('Being,
as the immediate indeterminate, is in fact nothing') there is a confused
recognition that not all relations are the work of the mind, but he adds
that Hegel never clearly articulates their interrelation in experience,
nor does he adequately isolate the ontological rationale of the univocity
of relation.20
Furthermore, Deely will argue that it is Peirce's 'semiotic categories'
that account for the transformation of the species-specific objective
world of the animal Umwelt into the species-specific objective world of
the human Lebenswelt, within which it is realized that the human Umwelt
(or Lebenswelt) is different from, and not coextensive with, the sense-per-
ceptible physical surroundings, and by reason of including understand-
ing the imperceptible relation of signification as such. The 'animal'
remains captured by its Umwelt, which never becomes present to it as an
Umwelt — although the animal is clearly aware of sense-perceptible
aspects of its surroundings. (Heidegger would say that the animal is
'benumbed'). Although Heidegger's analysis in FCM is 'violent and awk-
ward' (Derrida 1991, 111), it is obvious that Heidegger is struggling to
differentiate zoosemiosis (as common to animals) from anthroposemio-
sis (as unique to linguistic animals) without the necessary semiotic tools.
The approach taken by Deely is neither anthropomorphic (in fact, it
precisely avoids misplaced linguistic anthropomorphism) nor bad biol-
ogy; it 'simply' distinguishes among different uses of sign relations - to
wit, physiosemiosis, phytosemiosis, zoosemiosis, and anthroposemiosis.
Animals use signs and communicate, but they do not live in language

Umwelten 
71
and do not grasp imperceptible sign relations as such. Their apprehen-
sion terminates in sense-perceptible aspects of the physical environ-
ment. Or to be more reserved, we can say that currently we have no
knowledge of a non-human linguistic animal that ipso facto grasps (or
rather understands) the incorporeal sign relation as distinct from its
terms. The species-specific human Lebenswelt arises with the awareness of
the distinction between the relation and the things it relates; this is what
allows for the arbitrary systems of communication that we designate as
languages - and as a consequence for textuality and the infinite (in
principle) malleability of the Lebenswelt. Eugen Baer succintly states the
matter:
Semiotics [the human study of semiosis] begins ontogenetically as 'a
moment of anthroposemiosis' with the insight that experience depends on
the action of signs. Once signs are recognized as imperceptible ontological
relations which correlate objects and/or things, we are at the threshhold of
what for Deely is specifically anthroposemiotic, the ability to introduce into
objects the dimension of stipulability. This underlies the capacity for lan-
guage and renders semiosis in principle unlimited. The stipulable sign is
the characteristic trait of what Deely calls 'text.' And it is this capacity to
produce texts that distinguishes anthroposemiosis from zoosemiosis. It is
species-specific for human semiosis.
What exactly is textuality? Texts are strings of signs that are in principle
exchangeable (substitutable) with other signs in accordance with a given
code. Texts are thus transformable from one set of objects to another, pre-
cisely because their 'being' resides not in things or objects, but 'in-
between' them. (1992: 355-6)
Both Henri Bergson and Raymond Ruyer (who are major influences
on Deleuze and Guattari) make a similar distinction - albeit less analyti-
cally nuanced - between the animal and human animal use of signs. In
Germinal Life: The Difference and Repetition of Deleuze, Keith Ansell-Pearson
(1999, 54) reminds us that for Bergson, in Creative Evolution, the instinc-
tive signs that characterize the language of insects are limited and
attached to specific objects: 'The sign is adherent to the thing signified'
(Bergson 1975, 174). What characterizes human language is the ability
of signs to be transferred from one object to another; they become infi-
nitely 'mobile' rather than 'adherent' — ''the intelligent sign is mobile1
(ibid., 175; Bergson's italics). There is a difference in kind between the
human and animal use of signs (moreover, animals don't know they are

72 The Primacy of Semiosis
using signs). The main insight of Bergson is that without language - as
the awareness of the relation of signification, which allows the sign to be
'mobile' - the animal is 'riveted' to materially present sense-perceptible
objects. The animal is captured or riveted to an Umwelt, whereas the
human animal lives with the understanding of being-in-an-Umwelt and
can play with the relations that constitute it, and thereby enjoys the pos-
sibility, among others, of developing and discussing philosophies of life
and semiotics.
In L'animal, I'homme, lafonction symbolique, Ruyer (1964: 98-9) makes
essentially the same observation when discussing the well-known case of
Helen Keller, who was blind and deaf. He discusses the matter in terms
of the difference between the animal's use of stimulus-signals and the
human's grasp of sign-symbols, the difference being that the human ani-
mal grasps the relation of signification as such:
To understand a signal as a signal, following a conditioning process, is not
at all to understand it as a symbol. On the contrary the signal-function
blocks the symbol function. The decisive point for Helen Keller is that
'water' wasn't necessarily a sign-signal by which water was requested or
expected, but was 'the name of the substance whereby it could be men-
tioned, conceived, remembered, celebrated.' At that moment, the mean-
ing, for her, of the word 'water' could not be interpreted as the last phase
of a conditioning. As long as one attempted to condition Helen Keller to a word,
one in fact prevented her from understanding what language was. It was necessary
that she suddenly realized that the word had a meaning. A discovery that
leads to the discovery that everything has a name, and that every name had
a meaning. From now on she was no longer in an animal Umwelt, but in the
world.21
Deleuze and Guattari make a related observation in ATP when they
refer to the well-known example of the bees' dance studied by Karl von
Frisch22 as taken up by Emile Benveniste. Deleuze and Guattari are
claiming that the first determination of language is not trope or meta-
phor but indirect discourse. The bee 'has no language because it can com-
municate what it has seen but not transmit what has been
communicated to it. A bee that has seen a food source can communi-
cate the message to bees that did not see it, but a bee that has not seen it
cannot transmit the message to others that did not see it.' (ATP, 77). For
Deleuze and Guattari, language must be able to go from a second to a
third party, neither of whom has seen. Language is deterritorialized and

Umwelten 
73
can be passed on ad infinitum. As Maritain notes,23 commenting on von
Frisch's work, this means that bees use signs but do not know they are
using signs. The bees' dance is no more a language than the fact of a
dog sitting when his owner says 'sit.'24
Deleuze and Guattari will argue, following Spinoza's medieval ethics
and proto-ethology, that things, animals, or persons are defined by
movements and rests, speeds, and slownesses, and by affects. These
assemblages are individuations not of an already individuated object or
person, but rather of relational events that can include, for example, a
time of day, a season, or anything at all... a text, a social body.
Deleuze and Guattari contend that beings are distinguished not ana-
logically in terms of genus or species, but rather by their degrees of
'power,' which correspond to a certain capacity to be affected. They con-
struct a univocal Spinozist ethology or cartography of affective capaci-
ties. The univocity of being is expressed through one determining
factor: What are the affections or relations that a being can enter into -
what assemblages can it participate in - what are its becomings? From the
perspective of univocal being, the only difference is the different rela-
tions that a being can enter into. Univocity for Deleuze 'is said' of com-
pletely different, equivocal beings (boy, table, girl, train, god): 'a single
and same voice for the whole thousand-voiced multiple' (DR, 304). This
is a conception no longer of genera and species, but rather of the assem-
blages into which each being is capable of entering. In other words, a
being is defined by the relations and assemblages it can enter into - tell
me what relations you can enter into, and I will tell you who you are.
These relations, as the relations of relative beings, are Univocal in their
being as relations. And this gives us precisely the distinction in our expe-
rience between relative beings and their relations prior to a categorial
schema. In Spinoza: Practical Philosophy, Deleuze puts it thus: 'So an ani-
mal, a thing is never separable from its relations with the world' (1988a,
125). Gregory Bateson and many other biologists make the same obser-
vation - for Bateson, the 'unit of 'survival' was organism + environment.
In ATP (the book of subjectless events and becomings) this approach
is illustrated with (among many other striking and creative examples)
Jacob von UexkmTs notorious tick. The tick is viewed in terms of its
affective capacities or relations rather than in terms of physiology. As
Ansell-Pearson (GL, 187) notes in a brief but insightful encounter with
the work of Deely,25 this is a 'semiotics of affect' in which von Uexkull's
Umwelt theory and concept of organism can be understood in terms of
the scholastic notion of 'species;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;KLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLKKKLK

74 The Primacy of Semiosis
tions of descent. The organism does indeed inhabit a 'species-specific
objective word' (the expression is Deely's) in that its world is specific to
its biological type; but also in that its 'species,' whether impressed or
expressed, is what makes its 'world.' And as we have already noted at
some length, scholastic expressed 'species' are formal signs or interpret-
ants that are not 'subjective' in the modern classical sense. Their whole
being as ontological relations is in 'being-toward.' This is what makes
Umwelten 'objective' or open worlds rather than 'subjective' closed
worlds. Objective worlds are not in binary opposition with the modern
sense of subjective. Objective worlds as experienced include a shifting
amalgam of mind-dependent and mind-independent aspects (or the
'psychical' and 'physical') through the univocal being of sign relations.
This dynamic is what allows for the enterprise of constructive scientific
relative realism, through the critical control of objectification, and
through the possibility that some theories remain purely objective fic-
tions (i.e., with no physical lining) or return to the status of fictions
(e.g., the ether, phlogiston) whereas others become 'objective' testimo-
nies to nature's subjective being (i.e., the being nature has indepen-
dently of its being known). For example, the earth's tectonic plates now
drift and collide, over and above our thinking that they do, although for
many years such a 'fiction' was ridiculed. Some things are not reducible
to our experience of them, but paradoxically become more substanti-
ated and 'for themselves' the more we are related to them, or the more
they are 'for us' - 'the truth of the relative' or the truth of relations.26
Species-Specific Objective Worlds
A recapitulation: Deely has systematically and continuously argued for
the importance of the notion of Umwelt or species-specific worlds for
understanding the action and being of signs in the constitution of an
objective world - that is, a world to the extent that it exists in any way as
known. As experienced, the physical world is objective, it is an object of
awareness. The distinction between objects of experience that are only
objects of experience and those that are also physical existents also
occurs within experience (which leads some thinkers to a position in
which experience is 'subjective' and we can know nothing apart from
our 'constructions' or representations). Experience is not locked into
realism or idealism; it is neither/nor, for it is univocal in its being,
including both the constructions of the mind and elements that are not
reducible to the mind's constructive capacity.

Umwelten 
75
Instead of a dichotomy between subjective (observer dependent) and
inaccessible objective (observer independent), there is a trichotomy, or
triadic semiotic relation, including an experiencing organism (or inter-
pretant), the object experienced, and the basis on which the object
exists as experienced. I will present an extended quotation from Deely,
which I suggest indicates that semiotics has fortunately progressed, in
his hands, beyond anything Heidegger's phenomenology was able to
articulate:
That in which experience consists in the being proper to it is the sign rela-
tion, or rather, the network of sign relations colorfully called 'the semiotic
web' by Thomas Sebeok in a metaphor borrowed from the German biolo-
gist Jakob von Uexkull. This web is, on the one side, superordinate to phys-
ical nature [...], on the other side, subordinate to the constitution of the
knower (the cognitive organism). The being proper to experience is not
the being of objects, still less the being of things. It is the being proper to
the network of interpretive relations according to which the cognitive
organism is inserted in the environment not merely as one physical thing
among others (one substance with its accidents among other substances
with their accidents), but as a being whose objective world is shot through
and constituted by cares and interests species-specifically proper to it
according to its biological constitution. Beyond this, in the case of human
beings, the objective world is further structured through linguistic rela-
tions (a species-unique type of semiotic relation) which convey a cultural
heritage linked, not directly, but indirectly only, to a specific biological con-
stitution. 'Being-in-a-world,' that is to say, an objective world as distinct
from a merely physical environment, is not something uniquely human,
though 'being-in-a-world' that has the texture of linguistic understanding
woven into its fabric or perceptual and sensory objects is uniquely human.
(1992,309)
This brings us back to the difference between the animal Umwelt and
the human animal Umwelt, or Lebenswelt, as Deely will call it. As we have
already noted, this distinction lies in the peculiarity of the human ani-
mal's ability to interact and play with pure relations. This is equivalent to
the 'emergence' of language and allows for the possibility of inventing
an Umwelt in ways that are not strictly proportionate to biologically
determined positive, negative, or indifferent affects. Deely (NB, 221)
gives the example of legal systems, which distribute property not on the
basis of species territoriality but 'according to an abstract plan of objec-

76 The Primacy of Semiosis
tive boundaries imposed upon the physical environment as identified
with this or that of its features - for example, 'the Mississippi River as
separating Iowa from Illinois for a certain stretch.' The essential point
here is that the human Umwelt is not 'riveted' or 'captured' by its spe-
cies-specific world, as Bergson would say, but is able, through the human
understanding of relations as distinct from related objects, to be restruc-
tured Umwelt in infinite ways - an unbounded semiosis within anthro-
posemiosis, a human-becoming-itself in its unlimitedness.
As Deely notes (NB, 218-19), the notion of Umwelten or species-
specific worlds is now well established in semiotic studies to distinguish
between the prejacent physical environment and the objective world of
an orgaLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLL
Jakob von Uexkiill imagined the Umwelt as like an invisible bubble sur-
rounding the organism: 'We must first blow, in fancy, a soap bubble
around each creature to represent its own world, filled with the percep-
tions which it alone knows. When we ourselves step into one of these
bubbles, the familiar meadow is transformed. Many of its colourful fea-
tures disappear, others no longer belong together but appear in new
relationships. A new world comes into being.'
In the same extraordinary work, von Uexkiill also compared the
Umwelt or world of experience to a spider's web: 'As the spider spins its
threads, every subject spins his relations to certain characters of the
things around him, and weaves them into a firm web which carries his
existence' (ibid., 14). This is what Sebeok designated the semiotic web.
In order to illustrate the constitution of an objective world, Deely
(NB, 219) combines these two notions 'into the single model of a kind
of geodesic sphere whose interior as well as its surface consists of a series
of intersecting lines.' He notes that the spherical image is only analo-
gous, as the surface of the 'sphere' is irregular and determined by the
radii relations linking the individual with elements of its physical sur-
roundings (some of which are very close and some 'as far as alien galax-
ies'). The model is so valuable and interesting that I will quote from
Deely's own work, which would be absurd to paraphrase:
Each intersection is an object, each line a relationship. Lines radiate out-
wards from the center where each of us stands to the surface of the sphere,
and lines extend also crosswise, intersecting the radii. The radii lines repre-
sent relations between ideas and objects, the intersecting lines represent
relations between objects, and the intersections themselves represent the
objects. Thus, the objective world is the sphere of an individual's experi-

Umwelten 
77
ences built up out of relationships, and the internal constitution of this
sphere is precisely that of a web the various intersections of whose strands
present to us the objects according to the meaning of which we lead our
lives. At the center of such a three-dimensional spider's web, by maintain-
ing and elaborating it, we live our lives.
It is crucial to understand that in this model the surface of the geode-
sic sphere of experience is a 'virtual intersection or interface between
nature and culture.' The external senses guarantee that elements of the
physical surroundings are objectified in experience in interaction with
our bodies. Now this model of experience is further (and infinitely)
complexified by memory and imagination, which add new radii and fur-
ther intersections. Thus there are incorporated into this web of experi-
ence elements that do not correspond to actual physical environmental
influences. Now, as von Uexkull and Deely note, this web of experience
is determined by the biological constitution of the organism or species -
it is a species-specific objective world. As we have already had occasion
to observe, human animals understand the relational strands them-
selves, which structure sense-perceptible objects and which can now be
used to restructure the Umwelt, starting with the realization that it is an
Umwelt, and then perhaps wondering what other Umwelten are like -
which, as Deely claims (1990, 123), is a priori impossible in the original
Kantian scheme: 'Either Umweltenforschung is a form of transcendental
illusion, or, if, for example, von Frisch really did interpret with some
exactness the bee's dance or von Uexkull the toad's search image - then
von Uexkull, in extending Kant's ideas to biology, was doing something
more, something that the Kantian paradigm did not allow for, namely,
achieving objectively and grasping as such an intersubjective correspon-
dence between subjectivities attained through the sign relation.'
Deely argues that von Uexkull is going beyond the Kantian paradigm
in spite of himself. Von Uexkull saw the Umwelt as a 'subjective' or phe-
nomenal world distinct from an 'objective' world, but the semiotic
approach to experience cannot be completely assimilated to Kantian
idealism any more than it can be to simple realism. Semiotic reality is an
interpenetration of the mind's own constructs with aspects of a mind-
independent environment woven seamlessly together in the ontological
univocity of the sign relation. Semiotic objectivity (esse objectivum/objec-
tive being), as we have had much occasion to note, is not assimilable to
the modern opposition between subjective and objective. It is 'the truth
of the relative.' Objectivity in this sense is opposed to both subjectivity

78 The Primacy of Semiosis
and objectivity as understood in classical modern idealism. As Deely
notes (ibid., 122), the reappropriation of the scholastic notion of objec-
tivity (particularly as formulated by Poinsot - and implicitly developed
by Peirce) is 'necessary to make sense of the very title von Uexkiill gives
to a main section in one of his key essays (1957: 73), "The Same Subject
as an Object in Different Umwelten.™
This kind of objectivity is engendered by Peirce's interpretant or
proper significate outcome of a sign, which makes present an object
other than itself to some third in a mediated semiotic interaction that
cannot be reduced to a dyadic physical interaction. In Chaosmosis (1995,
22), Guattari suggests that we place the concept of an enlarged defini-
tion of 'subjectivity' within this relational perspective:
So we are proposing to decentre the question of the subject onto the ques-
tion of subjectivity. Traditionally, the subject was conceived as the ultimate
essence of individuation, as a pure, empty, prereflexive apprehension of
the world, a nucleus of sensibility, of expressivity - the unifier of states of
consciousness. With subjectivity we place the emphasis instead on the
founding instance of intentionality. This involves taking the relation
between subject and object by the middle and foregrounding the expres-
sive instance (or the interpretant of the Peirceian triad).
For Guattari, it was imperative to enlarge the definition of subjectivity
beyond the classical opposition between individual subject and society.
All his work involved developing a more 'transversalist' or 'schizoana-
lytic' approach to subjectivity, one that recognized the importance of
non-linguistic elements irreducible to the linguistic analysis of the Saus-
surian tradition. Guattari always affirmed the value and importance of
Peirce's semiotics over and above European semiology. It should also be
noted that part of Deely's contribution to the commonwealth of ideas
lies in his being one of the most astute contemporary readers and inno-
vators of a post-Peirceian semiotics capable of doing justice to our expe-
rience, rather than simply engaging in elaborate feats of explaining it
away.
Heideggerian Umwelten
In The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics: World, Finitude, Solitude
(1995), Heidegger, in some of his most relentless and stunningly
benumbing reflections, presents the thesis that 'the animal is poor in

Umwelten 
79
world1 (Heidegger's italics).28 I will not attempt here to give a complete
account of Heidegger's 1929-30 biology lectures,29 but will simply
attempt to indicate the relation between Heidegger, Peirce, and Deely
and thereby demonstrate the contemporary relevance of a semiotic
appropriation and reformulation of Jakob von Uexkiill's 
Umwelt
theory.30
For Heidegger (and for many others in their own way) what is pecu-
liar to the animal is the way it is captivated by its environment and is
thus 'poor in world.' What might this perhaps troubling and problem-
atic expression mean?
As a possible theme for a fundamental problem of metaphysics, Heidegger
asks this question: 'What is world?' And as a strategy for answering this
question, he undertakes a comparative examination of three theses: 'the
stone is worldless,' 'the animal is poor in world,' and 'man is world
forming.' He starts from the middle by asking what it means to say that
the animal is poor in world. He quickly notes (FCM, 192) that at first
sight this thesis appears 'to run directly counter to the most penetrating
fundamental reflections in biology and zoology, when we consider that
ever since J. von Uexkiill we have all become accustomed to talking
about the environmental world of the animal.' How does Heidegger deal
with this apparent contradiction? His thesis unfolds in the following way.
Being poor in world implies poverty in the sense of possessing less.
But less of what? (FCM, 193). Heidegger, taking most of his examples
from von Uexkiill, starts with the proposition that the animal has fewer
relationships than human Dasein has at its disposal. For example, the
bee, the frog, and the chaffinch all operate within their strictly limited
domains of relations. But there is something more crucial than this.
Heidegger contends that the manner in which an animal can 'pene-
trate' whatever is accessible to it is also limited. His fundamental claim,
which he will constantly rework and examine, is that the animal does
not know things as things. As a first approximation, the animal lacks the
structure of the apophantic as. This is in fact strikingly close to Deleuze
and Guattari's analysis in ATP (especially in the plateau 'The Geology of
Morals'). A threshold of deterritorialization is crossed wherein 'the sci-
entific world (Welt, as opposed to the Umwelt of the animal) [allows for]
the translation of all the flows, particles, codes, and territorialities of the
other strata into a sufficiently deterritorialized system of signs, in other
words into an overcoding specific to language' (ATP, 62).
The worker bee is familiar with the colour and scent of the blossoms it
frequents but does not know the stamens of these blossoms as stamens.

80 The Primacy of Semiosis
Nor does it know of the number of leaves or of the roots of the plant.
Heidegger will (FCM, 193) argue that compared to the world of ani-
mals, the world of man is more extensive, both in its penetrability 'and
in respect to the manner in which we can penetrate ever more deeply in
this penetrability.' This is why man is characterized as world forming.
Heidegger emphasizes that at this point in the analysis, there is no ques-
tion of claiming some hierarchical evaluation or superiority for man
and incompleteness for the animal.
To get closer to understanding the sense of the word 'poverty,'
Heidegger in his comparative examination turns to the stone, which is
worldless. The stone lies on the path but does not touch the path. Every-
thing around the stone is inaccessible to the stone itself (FCM, 197). The
stone is not deprived of anything (it is not poor in world) because it has
no access to the beings among which it turns up. Thus there is a distinc-
tion emerging between the specific manner of being pertaining to animals,
and the specific manner of being pertaining to a material thing. The rock is
given in some way to the lizard but not as a rock - the rock is not accessi-
ble to the lizard as a being. The blade of grass is a 'beetle path' for the
beetle, but it is not a blade of grass. Heidegger will argue that the meta-
physical significance of the specific relationships of animals with their
environments has never been fully appreciated. If the animal has some
access to the beings around it in a way that the stone does not, the ani-
mal is not deprived of world, but has world.
Heidegger frankly admits that the preliminary results of his compara-
tive examination are perplexing and apparently logically impossible:
'The animal reveals itself as a being which both has and does not have
world1 (Heidegger's italics). He argues that the concept of world must
therefore need further clarification.
I will pass over the discussion of solipsistic, modern idealism (Des-
cartes, Kant, Hegel) in which man is initially understood as subject and
consciousness, existing in its own isolated 'ego-sphere,' and take the
story up with Heidegger's clarification of the 'proper being or proper pecu-
liarity as the manner of being specific to the animal and its way of being proper to
itself 
[Sich-zu-eigen-sein] (FCM, 231). In distinguishing the organism
from a machine, Heidegger (like many others) notes that the 'peculiar'
character of the organism lies in its 'capacity' for s^production, or self-
preservation.31
The capacity for molecular s^production indicates a kind of boot-
strapping or circular production in which the capacity of the organism to
produce itself 'does not leave itself behind (FCM, 233) or escape itself. To

Umwelten 
81
use Heidegger's novel terminology, the capacity for self-production re-
mains proper to ^//without any self-consciousness or reflection. The essential
being of this sg/^productive capacity is properly peculiar [Eigentumlichkeit].
Heidegger reserves the expression 'self and selfhood for the specifically
human peculiarity of possessing reflection and consciousness beyond the
proper peculiarity of 5^production or autopoiesis proper to all organisms,
including human animals.32 The proper being of the animal or of ani-
mality lies in this proper peculiarity of sg/^production and possession, which
does not lose itself but rather remains 'its self in this autopoietic drive or
capacity. This drive has a self-reserve and circular production that is not
reflective. Thus, for Heidegger, neither the animal's mode of being nor
its behaviour directs itself towards beings as such.
The essential lesson of this analysis is that ultimately, for Heidegger
(and Deely), the environing world (Umgebung), or Umwelt of the animal,
is ready to hand but not present at hand. The animal is open to its sur-
roundings, but not as a world that is not coextensive or reducible to the
prejacent environment. Heidegger gives detailed accounts of experi-
ments on bees (among other examples), drawn from the work of von
Uexkiill, to illustrate the thesis that the behaviour of the animal (in this
case the bee) is not determined by the presence or absence of honey or
flowers but rather by a play of inhibited and released drives. The bee is
captured by the sun and does not grasp the sun as such - it does not view
the sun. The animal is encircled by a ring of drives within which it is
both open and captivated - it is incapable of ever properly attending to some-
thing as such (FCM, 248). Heidegger is distinguishing this approach
from that of von Uexkiill, who suggests that the animal lives an Umwelt as
an Umwelt. It will be in anthroposemiosis that this realization occurs.
However, Heidegger moderates the analysis:
This question now leads us toward the distinction we tried to express by
talking of man's world-forming and the animal's poverty in world, a poverty
which, roughly put, is nonetheless a kind of wealth. The difficulty of the
problem lies in the fact that in our questioning we always and inevitably
interpret the poverty in world and the peculiar encirclement proper to the
animal in such a way that we end up talking as if that which the animal
relates to and the manner in which it does so were some being, and as if
the relation involved were an ontological relation that is manifest to the
animal. The fact that this is not the case forces us to claim that the essence of
life can become accessible only if we consider it in a deconstructive [abbauenden]
fashion. But this does not mean that life represents something inferior or

82 The Primacy of Semiosis
some kind of lower level in comparison with human Dasein. On the con-
trary, life is a domain which possesses a wealth of openness with which the
human world may have nothing to compare. (FCM 255)
Deely contends that although Heidegger makes use of the term 'onto-
logical relation,' he does not have the univocal concept of it as devel-
oped by Poinsot.33 The ontological relation is not manifest to the
animal because it is imperceptible and in its proper univocal being is nei-
ther mind-dependent nor mind-independent (although it will be one or
the other at any given hie and nunc). Animals can be aware of 'absent
signifieds' (objects that are not actually present), but these absent
objects would always have some physical instantiation. Relations, by con-
trast, occur as the 'incorporeal vapour' (Deleuze) or as the 'ethereal
linkage itself between the terms' (Deely), which can be understood but not
seen or touched. As Deely emphasizes, non-human animals see related
things but not the relations (which can only be understood, not per-
ceived). The human animal, by distinguishing things from objects (and
the relations from both) within anthroposemiosis, can use those rela-
tions to create the systems of communication we call languages. As we
shall see in the following chapter on autopoiesis, Maturana will argue in
a similar way, claiming that animals do not live in language, although he
will suggest that some animals can begin to enter into language (as a
coordination of a coordination of acts) when living with languaging
human animals. However, Deely will claim that although animals can
enter into coordinations of coordinations of acts - as long as these coor-
dinations terminate in sense-perceptible objects - they have not
attained language in its species-specific human sense. Animals commu-
nicate and are aware of their surroundings, but not of their surround-
ings as surroundings, of their Umwelt as an Umwelt or objective world
grasped as a whole in relation to itself; this requires a distinction of
objects from things and relations from both. This, as Deleuze and
Guattari observe, is what transforms an Umwelt into a Welt or - to use
Husserl and Deely's term - a Lebenswelt. It is a question of thresholds.
The fact of Guattarian 'non-human enunciation,' 'proto-subjectivity,'
'ontological intensities,' 'specific enunciative consistencies,' or a 'non-
human for-itself does not gainsay a distinction between human and
non-human enunciation.34 What is remarkable in Guattari's 'fractal
ontology' and 'transversalist' enlargement of enunciation is the refusal
to accept the couplet Being-being as an ontological binary digit and to
replace it rather with polyphonic Being and processes of deterritorial-
ization deploying particular relations of alterity.35 Emphasis is no longer

Umwelten 
83
placed on Being but on the manner of being, the machination produc-
ing the existent (1995, 108-9).
Deleuze and Guattari's appropriation of Ruyer's work in WIP gives us
one line of approach to the question of whether a robot (as these cur-
rently exist) has an Umwelt.m To the extent that the robot is not a primary
true form - that is, is not self-producing and does not have the 'proper
peculiarity' of autopoietic systems - it cannot even have 'poverty in
world,' never mind an Umwelt?*1 In Chaosmosis, developing an approach
already proposed by Stafford Beer, Guattari seeks to expand the concept
of autopoiesis, arguing that when one thinks in terms of the machinic
assemblages that machines constitute with human beings, 'they become
ipso facto autopoietic' (1995, 40). This coupling between the biosphere
and the mechanospere (and reworking of the concept of autopiesis)
allows for a more complex approach to questions of non-human enunci-
ation and 'a-signifying semiotics' - an approach that will not be devel-
oped further at this point.
The Transformation of Umwelt into Lebenswelt
As we indicated earlier, Deely (1998, 217) calls 'Peirce's "new list of cate-
gories" his "semiotic categories," or "categories of experience," because
precisely what they do is account for the transformation of the animal
Umwelt into the human Lebenswelt.' I will conclude this chapter with a
short summary of Deely's argument.
The fundamental argument is that Peirce's category of Firstness -
which is for Deely equivalent to Avicenna's univocal being, or Aquinas'
'being-as-first-known' (primum intelligibile), or (within the context of this
book) Deleuze's 'sense,' or Heidegger's prelogical apprehension of
beings as a whole - provides for the intelligibility of the objective world
(Umwelt) presented in perception, apprehended in relation to itself. As
Deely notes (ibid., 220): 'Here, however, at the level of primum intelligi-
bile, it is not a question of any given object of perception being cognized
in relation to itself. It is rather a question of the objective world as such,
the Umwelt as the totality of objectification at any given moment, being
grasped in relation to itself.'
For Deely this is Peirce's category of 'Firstness,' 'the conception of
being or existing independently of anything else' (CP, 6.32) ;38 'the
present in general' (ibid., 1:547). It is the apprehension of the imper-
ceptible 'relation to itself that transforms the Umwelt into a Welt or Leb-
enswelt over and above the naturally biologically determined Umwelt of
zoosemiosis. For Deely it is at this point that Umwelt becomes present at

84 The Primacy of Semiosis
hand rather than ready to hand. Firstness as a species-specifically
human mode of apprehension establishes the possibility of asking the
question, 'What is that?' Deely (1998, 226) writes:
The animal aware of its objective world [ Umwelt] in such a fashion is alone
positioned to form the conception along with reality, and of a piece with it,
of otherness. Otherness (present-at-handness, in contrast to the ready-to-
handness which reduces the environment within objectivity to the level of
that extension of organismic dispositions which is the essence of an Umwelt
proportioned to the biological nature of the cognizing organism) arises
precisely within experience through 'brute actions of one subject or sub-
stance on another, regardless of law or of any third subject' (CP 5.469). It is
'the conception of being relative to, the conception of reaction with, some-
thing else' (CP 6.32). It is, in a word, the conception of 'something other,'
of one thing different from another thing within the play of objects of
awareness. The experience of otherness within firstness is the motivation of
every question of the form 'What is that?'
Deely concludes his account of the relevance of Peirce's 'semiotic cat-
egories' (which unlike Aristotle's or Kant's are designed to express the
interweaving of mind-dependent and mind-independent relations in
the univocal being of the sign relation as an ontological relation) by
claiming that although Heidegger does not have the clarity of Peirce's
thought on sign relations and their manner of being, what Heidegger
does contribute is an extraordinary analysis of the distinction within
human experience between objects and things subsumed within the
concept of being-as-first-known.
One might conclude by suggesting that Deleuze's 'logic of sense'
should not be ignored in any attempt to understand 'things' as signs,
and their 'external' relations on a univocal plane of immanence.39 Lan-
guage, understood as the relation between a proposition and thing, is
possible because of the incorporeality of univocal sense attributed to
bodies, but distinguished from them. It is the 'event' of sense that allows
for language to be in relation with things. The question of the truth or
falsity of a proposition requires this primary univocity of sense and rela-
tion. Even a false proposition has a sense. Deleuze thought that every-
thing he wrote constituted a theory of signs, and both Deleuze and
Guattari saw Peirce as the modern inventor of semiotics, a semiotics
they complexify for their own peculiar purposes.

5 Autopoiesis and Languaging
Creation and self-positing mutually imply each other because what is truly cre-
ated, from the living being to the work of art, thereby enjoys a self-positing of
itself, or an autopoietic characteristic by which it is recognized.
Deleuze and Guattari (WIP, 11)
The decisive threshold constituting this new aesthetic paradigm lies in the apti-
tude of these processes of creation to auto-affirm themselves as existential
nuclei, autopoietic machines.
Guattari (1995, 106)
The concept of autopoiesis, as already noted, has significant relations
with the concept of an Umwelt. The purpose of this chapter is to give
some account of Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela's theory of
autopoiesis, particularly in relation to language or 'languaging,' and to
determine whether, with some modifications (not unlike those applied
to Jakob von UexkiiU's work by Deely), that theory is compatible with a
doctrine of signs that affirms ontological relations and interbeing - or
the being of the between - and escapes from the realist/idealist opposi-
tion into a mutual specification or codetermination between living
beings and their worlds.1
Background and Context
Maturana and Varela's field of study originates in biology and neuro-
physiology and is concerned primarily with how biological processes are
related to the phenomena of cognition and language. It would be fair to

86 The Primacy of Semiosis
say that contemporary philosophy and scientific discourse remain
largely ignorant of their work (outside of a few specialized fields); yet
their research has profound consequences for our understanding of
mind, information, evolution, causality, and autonomy.
To the extent that Maturana's work is known at all to non-specialists, it
is for his co-authorship (with Letvin and McCulloch) of the classic 1959
paper 'What the Frog's Eye Tells the Frog's Brain'2 and for his later work
with Varela.
Guattari, in his most recent work, Chaosmosis (1995), appropriates
and develops Maturana and Varela's concept of autopoiesis, arguing
that it is a useful conceptual tool for analysing unconscious formations
and the aesthetic/autopoietic generation of novel and affirmative sub-
jectivities.
Maturana and Varela published Autopoiesis and Cognition (1980) and
The Tree of Knowledge (1987). The Centre for Philosophy and History of
Science at Boston University described Autopoiesis and Cognition 'as
among the most original attempts at a systematic biology in decades,
and as a profoundly philosophical work' in which Maturana and Varela
construct a theoretical biology that defines living systems not as the rep-
resented objects of observation and description, but rather as self-
contained entities whose only reference is to themselves.3
For Maturana and Varela this requires that a distinction be main-
tained between our descriptions of living systems and their actual opera-
tions. They remind us that 'everything that is said is said by someone' -
that is, by an observer (and participant) in language. The 'observer' is
constructed in and by language. They argue that it is essential not to
confuse the operation of the living system with descriptions made from
the 'outside' by an observer. This distinction is ignored when elements
of our descriptions are incorporated into an explanatory conceptual sys-
tem. Valid descriptions of a system's actual operations ought to be con-
cerned with the system's internal dynamics, not with referring these
dynamics (its autopoiesis) to some external encompassing context. For
example, 'purpose' and 'aims' are not features of the organization of
any machine, living or otherwise. These terms arise in the domain of
external descriptions and ' have no explanatory value in the phenomeno-
logical domain they pretend to illuminate, because they do not refer to
processes indeed operating in the generation of any of its phenome-
non' (Maturana and Varela 1980, 86).
As an illustration of this, they offer the example of the navigator who
has always lived in a submarine. The navigator is to be understood as

Autopoiesis and Languaging 87
the nervous system, not the 'outside' observer of the nervous system
(Maturana and Varela 1987, 137). All that exists for the navigator
are indicator readings. It is only for an observer 'outside' that relation-
ships are distinguished between the submarine's movements and its
environment. The dynamics of the submarine's different states, with
its navigator who does not know the outside world, never occur with rep-
resentations of the world the 'outside observer' sees. There are no enti-
ties such as 'beaches' or 'reefs' for the submarine or navigator, only
correlations between indicator readings. Maturana and Varela argue
that this analogy is valid for all living systems. The 'observer' is also gen-
erated by a living system, of which he or she cannot be an 'outside'
observer.
Observers can generate different descriptions of the activities of living
systems, depending on the distinctions they make. A system can be seen
in the domain of its internal states (or milieu), wherein the 'environ-
ment' is bracketed. Or a system can be described in terms of its interac-
tions with an environment (i.e., its exterior or annexed milieu).
Given the crucial role of the observer in generating distinctions
among domains or milieux, Maturana and Varela propose an account
of the self-referential dynamics of living systems and their interactions
that explains the emergence of language, and within language the fur-
ther generation of the experience of self-consciousness (i.e., the
observer). At this point I shall simply emphasize that for Maturana and
Varela, language, mind, and consciousness are not 'in' the brain,
rather, they are phenomena of the networks of social interactions (or
'structural couplings') that constitute language. Deleuze and Guattari
develop the social (rather than individual) character of enunciation
with the concept of 'collective assemblages' (q.v. ATP, 'Postulates of
Linguistics').
First I will explain Maturana and Varela's basic concepts. Their shift
in perspective requires us to stop importing the descriptive elements of
an 'outside observer' of the sort that produce the standard characteriza-
tions of living systems such as species and genus - that is, classifications
produced in terms of function or purpose, or of observed organism-
environment relations, or of causal interactions with an external world.
The latter, for instance, are semantic descriptions that do not apply in
the domain of the operations of the nervous system itself, which has nei-
ther purpose nor interaction with an environment. These can only be
interactions from the perspective of an outside observer. A living system
responds to its own changes of state, which are determined by its struc-

88 The Primacy of Semiosis
ture (i.e., the actual components, and the actual relations between them
that constitute an organism or a composite unity of any kind).
Purposes or aims are not features of the 'organization' of any
machine, living or otherwise. These notions belong to the domain of
discourse about our actions. ' "organization" denotes those relations that
must exist among the components of a system for it to be a member of a
particular class. "Structure" [what Deleuze and Guattari call strata or
stratification] denotes the components and relations that actually con-
stitute a particular unity and make its organisation real' (Maturana and
Varela 1987, 47). 'Organization,' in this sense, is like a plan implying or
referring to relations that must exist for a unity to continue to exist as a
member of a particular class. Maturana and Varela emphasize that
'organization' is not to be understood in a transcendent or mystical
sense, as having some explanatory value of its own. Organization implies
a particular set of relations. For example, in an autopoietic system, orga-
nization refers to the network of processes and relations that realize the
system. The 'structure' of a living system is in constant transformation
(whereas its organization or abstract machine remains invariant). In a
non-living system (such as a toilet) the 'organization' consists in the
assemblage of relations between an apparatus capable of detecting the
water level and another apparatus capable of stopping the inflow of
water. The specific structure could be changed by using wood instead of
plastic components, but there would still be a toilet organization.
Maturana and Varela define a living system, in contrast to this, as an
'autopoietic machine' that at the most fundamental level produces
itself. This is to be distinguished from allopoietic machines, which pro-
duce something different from themselves. An autopoietic machine
regenerates its cellular structure (albeit not indefinitely). The product is
the same as the network of processes involved in production. A car is produced
by processes independent of the organization of the car, and its 'prod-
uct' (i.e., transport) is not part of its organization.
Thus an autopoietic system maintains its organization and defines its
boundaries through the continuous production of its components. If
the autopoietic process is interrupted, the system's organization (i.e., its
identity as a particular kind of unity) is lost, and the system disintegrates
(perishes/dies). From this perspective, autopoietic machines are, first
of all, autonomous: 'That is, they subordinate all changes to the mainte-
nance of their own organization.' Second, they 'have individuality; that
is by keeping their organisation as an invariant through its continuous
production they maintain an identity which is independent of their

Autopoiesis and Languaging 89
interactions with an observer. Allopoietic machines have an identity that
depends on the observer and is not determined through their opera-
tion, because its product is different from itself; allopoietic machines do
not have individuality' (Maturana and Varela 1980, 80).
The self-referential character of Maturana and Varela's (autopoietic)
systems that have no 'outside' was described by the editors of Autopoiesis
and Cognition as 'Leibnizian for our day.' Leibniz asserted that unities or
'monads' are absolutely independent of one another and do not 'act'
on or 'cause' change in other unities. God has established a harmony
between unities such that they 'express' one another. This reference to
Leibniz is also found in Thure von Uexkull's introduction to Jakob von
Uexkull's Theory of Meaning (discussed briefly below). These connec-
tions are made at this point simply to illustrate the complementarity and
intertwining of ideas to be found in the varied theses within both the
humanities and the sciences we are examining here. The purpose is not
to construct a grand unified theory, but rather to point to a crisis across
all knowledge disciplines in the mechanized and instrumental theories
of the body, mind, language, and society that have been the product of a
positivist approach to science. All of these thinkers are searching for a
non-mechanized comprehension of the world, albeit in different fields
of knowledge.
An organism presupposes an 'organization' or abstract machine -
that is, processes and relations between components - not the properties
of components themselves. This distinguishes the approach of the
thinkers discussed above from traditional mechanistic theories, which
are concerned with components rather than relations (e.g., explaining
living systems in terms of genetic structure and thereby obscuring the
autonomous 'organization' or abstract machine of living systems). Each
of the above-mentioned thinkers will be discussed briefly in relation to
Maturana and Varela.
Leibniz's concept of monad4 refers to his conception of the world as
made up of an infinite number of simple unities or 'monads,' which do
not act on one another. For Leibniz, these monads 'have no windows by
which anything could come in or go out' (Monadology, para. 7).
Athough no monad really acts on any other, God has established a har-
mony among the states of all monads. In the language of Leibniz, God
has created substances such that each one 'expresses' all others.
Leibniz argues that although monads can only have a perspective on
the universe, there is in fact a 'single universe,' which monads perceive
from their different positions. In theory, the real nature of the world

90 The Primacy of Semiosis
can be described neutrally - that is, outside of any particular perspec-
tive.
Nietzsche radically develops Leibniz's 'perspectivism,' arguing that
there is nothing apart from perspectives and that the idea of the world
or universe 'in itself is a fiction: 'As if the world would still remain after
one had deducted the perspective' (1968, 567).
To make any claim about the world in itself would require going
beyond any particular perspective - to 'the view from nowhere,' or
God's view. This should not be understood in the sense that there are
only 'mere interpretations.' There are nothing but interpretations.
Maturana contends that reality as a universe of independent entities is a
fiction of the descriptive domain and that the notion of reality should
be applied to this domain of descriptions in which we, the describing
system, interact with our descriptions as z/with independent entities. He
argues, furthermore, that this is 'a constitutive human cognitive condi-
tion, not a circumstantial limitation' (Maturana 1988, 80).
Maturana and Varela are seen as 'Leibnizians for our day' because
they develop the notion of structure-determined self-referential unities
that do not have 'inputs' or 'outputs' (such as in the computer model of
the brain). However, in their conceptual system they forgo Leibniz's a
priori reliance on 'the will of God.'
Maturana and Varela stress that both the proposition of a phenome-
non to be explained (e.g., cognition) and the proposition of an ad hoc
generative mechanism (e.g., autopoiesis) are brought forth a priori in
the praxis (experience) of living of the observer. From this perspective,
scientific explanations are creations of the human mind and explain
human experience and not an independent world.
Here we can begin to see that Maturana and Varela oscillate between
realist claims about the nature of the individuality of autopoietic systems
independent of an observer and idealist and phenomenological claims
wherein thought is not able to have a real relation with something other
than itself. Ideas have become Berkeleyian descriptions rather than
signs that are capable - given the necessary conditions - of relating to a
mind-independent world. In other words, there is no univocal ontologi-
cal relation in the modern and nominalist post-Kantian tradition with
which Maturana and Varela align themselves, no possibility of escape
from interiority or 'transcendental subjectivity' or the phenomenal
structure of Dasein.
Looking back over the development of the concept of autopoiesis,
Varela (1996, 407) expresses himself thus:

Autopoiesis and Languaging 91
The tendency to which I refer, stated briefly, is the disappearance of the
intellectual and social space which makes cognition a mentalist representa-
tion and the human being a rational agent. It is the disappearance of what
Heidegger calls the period of the image of the world and what could also
be referred to as Cartesianism. If autopoiesis has been influential it is
because it was able to align itself with another project which focuses on the
interpretive capacity of the living being and conceives of the human as an agent
which doesn't discover the world, but rather constitutes it. It is what we
could call the ontological turn of modernity.
A complex set of themes is unfolding here, which only slowly will
become digestible. Varela in recent years has distanced himself from
Maturana's 'constitutive ontology' or 'ontology of observing' and is
seeking to develop a 'naturalized phenomenology' or 'generative neu-
rophenomenology.' But without the concept of univocal ontological
relation, Varela might remain enmeshed in the same kinds of problems
that have befallen Heidegger who, while grasping the importance of
univocity, or an order of being that is neither 'subjective' nor 'objective,'
never completely abandons a phenomenological method, even when he
seeks to do so. Maturana contends that Heidegger (presumably in his
later work) seeks to conserve the 'objectivity' of the being that shows up
in a distinction, and that in doing so Heidegger is mistaken.
For the present I will argue that Maturana and Varela, like Heidegger,
recognize the importance of the interpretive capacities of human
beings; but without an understanding of signs as ontological relations
they always slip into an idealism based on the primacy of consciousness
in the constitution or bringing-forth of the world. These approaches are
bedevilled by a lack of awareness of the univocal action of sign relations
of the sort that allow for a genuine communion and shifting interface
between mind and nature. They encounter the same problem as von
Uexkiill with his Kantian Umwelt theory.5
The reference to Leibniz's 'monads' will appear also in the introduc-
tion to Jakob von Uexkull's 'The Theory of Meaning' (1982). Von
Uexkull's term Umwelt has often been translated in a Kantian sense
as a phenomenal or self-world, and his son Thure (1982, 3) offers this
description:
Reality, to which all things must yield and from which everything must
derive, is not 'outside' in infinite space that has neither beginning nor end
and that is filled with a cloud of elementary particles. Nor is it 'inside,'

92 The Primacy of Semiosis
within ourselves in the indistinct, distorted images of this 'outside' that our
minds create. It reveals itself in the worlds (Jakob von Uexkull calls them
Umwelten) with which sensual perception surrounds all living beings as if
with bubbles that are sharply delineated but invisible to the outside
observer. These 'bubbles of self-worlds' are like Leibniz's 'monads' the
bricks and mortar of reality.6
We have sketched briefly the background and context of Maturana and
Varela's work. Its content now demands articulation, particularly with
regard to their understanding of cognition.
Maturana and Varela introduce complex terminology that can be
extremely difficult to grasp on a first reading (partly due to the unfamil-
iar syntax and vocabulary). Because their ideas are so interdependent,
the basic concepts must be clearly understood so that an appreciation of
their hypothesis is possible.7
Maturana and Varela's definition of cognition is central to their the-
ory of autopoiesis and will now be examined.8
Cognitive Systems
A cognitive system is a system whose organisation defines a domain of inter-
actions in which it can act with relevance to the maintenance of itself, and
the process of cognition is the actual (inductive) acting or behaving in this
domain. Living systems are cognitive systems, and living as a process is a process of
cognition. This statement is valid for all organisms, with and without a ner-
vous system. (Maturana 1980, 13)
Cognition, in this reformulation, is not the acquisition of knowledge by a
'knowing subject,' or an epiphenomenal by-product of neuronal activity
in the brain, but rather the organizing activity of living systems (i.e., their
autopoiesis). This activity manifests itself from the dynamics of the indi-
vidual cell all the way up to the self-regulatory capacities of the planet.
An organism 'knows how' to live - it is displaying effective or adequate
action that enables it to continue its existence in an environment. This
reformulation of cognition as effective action demands a fundamental
conceptual change in our contemporary understanding of cognition, in
that it does not assume objects of knowledge, representations in the
'mind' or 'information processing' and 'storage.' As Maturana (1990,
36) expresses it: 'Cognition as a biological phenomena ... has no con-
tent and is not 'about' anything. Therefore when we say that we know

Autopoiesis and Languaging 93
some-thingwe are not connoting what happens in the mechanism of the
phenomenon of cognition as a biological phenomena; we are reflecting
in language on what we do.'
From within the system there is only 'know how.' Knowledge as tradi-
tionally understood (i.e., as an embodiment of 'truth' that reflects the
world 'in itself,' independent of the 'knower') exists from the point of
view of an observer. Our 'knowledge' of 'the world' reflects a cut made
within experience between what we call 'ourselves' and what we call 'the
world.' For Maturana, knowledge as something independent of us is a
fiction of description in which the describing system interacts with
descriptions as if they were separate entities.
Maturana and Varela argue that adequate behaviour or action is the
only criterion we have for assessing cognition. They are not saying what
cognition is, but rather how we, as observers, recognize it. Evaluations of
whether or not there is 'knowledge' are always made in a relational con-
text. 'Knowing is doing.' We expect a demonstration of effective behav-
iour in a context that we specify with a question. For example, the only
way a person's piano-playing ability can be assessed is through his or her
playing of the piano. However, whether or not adequate behaviour is
demonstrated depends on the presupposition of the questioner.
Maturana and Varela are proposing that living systems are cognitive
systems in that they display effective action or behaviour in the activity
of autopoiesis (living). The ability of a living system to maintain its auto-
poiesis will, they argue, necessarily generate further recursive couplings
with its medium and with other living systems, which may under certain
conditions (to be described hereafter) further generate language and
the observer capable of describing himself or herself in language. From
this perspective the nervous system does not function with representa-
tions or 'take in' an environment. Such terms only exist in the descrip-
tive realm of organisms capable of language.
For Maturana, mental terms such as 'knowledge' cannot meaningfully
be taken as descriptions of state or structure. To say that 'the animal
knows X' is not a statement about a static state but refers rather to
actions (past or projected).
Maturana and Varela propose a scientific explanation of cognition as
effective action. This explanation must take into account four require-
ments:
1. The specification of a phenomenon to be explained as a feature of the experience
of an observer through the description of what he or she must do to experience

94 The Primacy of Semiosis
it. The phenomenon to be explained is the effective action of a living
being in its environment, how it conserves its organization (identity).
2. The proposition of a mechanism that would give rise to the experience of the
phenomenon to be explained. The explanatory generative mechanism is
autopoiesis, the autonomous organization of living beings.
3. The deduction, from the mechanism proposed in 2, of other phenomena.
Deducing from 2. other phenomena, such as behavioural coordina-
tion in interactions recurring between living beings.
4. The experience by an observer of the additional phenomena deduced in 3. Fur-
ther observations; social phenomena, language, and self-conscious-
ness, obtained from 3, and explaining how these arise.
In other words, Maturana and Varela propose a conceptual system
that seeks to demonstrate how cognition as effective action can produce
living beings that, like ourselves, are capable of making descriptions and
reflecting on them.
Note well that Maturana and Varela's scientific explanation makes no
claims to objectivity and does not require it. Remember, too, that they
argue that the notion of objectivity is a fiction. Scientific explanations
explain an observer's experience, not an independent world. They also
argue that this is the intrinsic character of all scientific explanations,
regardless of the preconceptions that certain scientists and philoso-
phers may entertain about the objectivity of science.
Cognition as effective action includes the cellular level and deals with
the relevance of action to the maintenance of autopoiesis. Deleuze and
Guattari affirm that in the economy of the cell there are molecular per-
ceptions no less than molecular reactions. This can be seen in 'the prop-
erty of regulatory agents to "recognise" only one or two kinds of
chemicals in a very diverse milieu of exteriority' (ATP, 51). The cell is
displaying cognition in its effective action and ability to 'recognize' -
although this doesn't imply perception in the sense of image or repre-
sentation.
The term 'autopoiesis' was foreshadowed in the preceding pages. To
ensure clarity, we again emphasize that autopoiesis means self-produc-
tion, not reproduction. The formal definition is as follows:
An autopoietic machine is a machine organised (defined as a unity) as a
network of processes of production (transformation and destruction) of
components that produces the components which: (i) through their inter-
action and transformations continuously regenerate and realise the net-

Autopoiesis and Languaging 95
work of processes (relations) that produced them; and (ii) constitute it
(the machine) as a concrete unity in the space in which they (the compo-
nents) exist by specifying the topological domain of its realisation as a net-
work.' (Maturana and Varela 1980, 79).
Such a machinic conception also arises in Deleuze and Guattari's por-
trayal of desiring production in Anti-Oedipus 1983, 1): 'Everywhere it is
machines - real ones not figurative ones: machines driving other
machines, machines being driven by other machines, with all the neces-
sary couplings and connections ... The breast is a machine that pro-
duces milk and the mouth is a machine coupled to it.'
Reproduction assumes the prior existence of an autopoietic unity that
is capable of reproduction, and consequently reproduction is not a
defining characteristic of the living. A mule is capable of living without
reproducing itself- as are old trees, young and older people, and so on.
Living Systems
To understand Maturana and Varela's theory of living systems requires
the exposition of three critical concepts that form the basis of their
explanation: (1) operational closure, (2) structure determinism, and
(3) structural coupling.
Operational Closure
This term refers to the activity of the nervous system for which there is
no 'inside' or 'outside' but only the maintenance of correlations that
continuously change.
Through his research on perception and colour vision, Maturana
concluded that perception should not be viewed as the grasping of an
external reality but rather as the generator of phenomena. It is possible
to illustrate this with a number of quite simple perceptual experiments
(see Maturana and Varela 1987, 18,19, 20). For example, Maturana and
Varela describe an experiment on the phenomenon of coloured shad-
ows, noted by Otto von Gueriche in 1672 and first explained in physio-
logical terms by Goethe.
If one looks at the two shadows of an object that simultaneously par-
tially intercepts the paths of two different lights, one white and one red,
it is apparent that the area of the shadow from the red light that receives
white light looks blue-green. This is surprising, but nevertheless an

96 The Primacy of Semiosis
incontrovertible experiential fact. The area of the shadow from the red
light 'should' look white or grey, because it receives only white light. If
an instrument is used to measure the light composition in this example,
it will be found that there is no predominance of wavelengths called
green or blue in the shadow seen as bluish green, but only the normal
distribution occurring in white light.
Maturana and Varela emphasize that this is not an isolated situation
that can be classified as an 'illusion': 'Our experience of a world of
coloured objects is literally independent of the wavelength composition
of the light coming from any scene we look at... If I take an orange from
my room to the patio, the orange will seem to be the same color; how-
ever, the inside of the house was illuminated by fluorescent light, which
has a greater number of so called blue (or short) wavelengths, whereas
the sun has mostly so-called red (or long) wavelengths' (ibid. 1987, 22).
The essential argument they are demonstrating is that the experience of
colour is not determined by the light received from an object but rather
'corresponds to a specific pattern of states which the structure of the
organism determines.' They further argue that this is true for all dimen-
sions of visual experience (such as movement, texture, and form) and in
fact also for any other mode of perception (such as touch and hear-
ing).9 Von Uexkiill, inspired by Kantian philosophy, was perhaps the
first scientist clearly to anchor perception in biology. In this critical
biology the world known through the senses - the Umwelt - can only
be a phenomenal world, not an objectively known world of things
in themselves. Von Uexkiill claims that each living organism, because
of its own properties, determines an individual environment. Only
an independent being that does not experience the world but knows
it unconditionally could speak of an 'objective' world: 'A semiotic that
is biologically uninformed is sheer amateurishness,' asserted von
Uexkiill.10 (As noted in the previous chapter, von Uexkiill's - and Mat-
urana's - attachment to Kantian phenomenology does not allow the
potential of semiotic to fully develop into a semiotic that is neither real-
ist nor idealist, but capable of incorporating elements from both posi-
tions.)
Maturana contends that these experiences demonstrate that we can-
not experientially distinguish 'perception,' 'illusion,' and 'hallucina-
tion' in the actual living of these experiences, but only after the fact, a
posteriori. As a consequence, the notion of objectivity - that is, the ability
to perceive the features of a world independent of the observer - is bio-
logically impossible. Any theory that does not question the properties of

Autopoiesis and Languaging 97
the observer assumes the independent existence of what is known (be it
matter, energy, ideas, God, mind, spirit, ... or reality).
For many, this seems to contradict common sense. However, for Mat-
urana and Varela, the proposition that 'reality' is constructed (commen-
surate with our biological and social history) rather than received as an
impression of 'objective reality' can be practically demonstrated: 'We do
not see the "space" of the world; we live our field of vision. We do not
see the "colours" of the world; we live our chromatic space' (ibid., 23).
In this approach, structure is dynamic rathen than static. Structure
alters with every interaction, particularly with respect to living systems,
which are constantly undergoing changes in their components and the
relations between these components. Living systems are operationally
closed, not thermodynamically closed. Their identity (or autonomy) is
specified by a network of dynamic processes whose effects do not leave
that network. Maturana and Varela call this dynamism of the nervous
system 'structural plasticity.' Deleuze and Guattari draw on insights from
molecular biology throughout their work. For example: 'We should
speak less of automatism of a higher center than coordinations between
centers and of the cellular groupings or molecular populations that per-
form these couplings' (ATP, 388). They see this behavioral-biological
'machinics' or molecular engineering as a tool for understanding prob-
lems of consistency.
Structure Determinism
From their studies in the neurophysiology of perception, Maturana and
Varela developed the hypothesis that it is a system's structure (i.e., its
actualized components and the relations between them) that deter-
mines the behaviour or changes of state the system may undergo. This
applies equally to living systems (autopoietic machines) and non-living
systems (allopoietic machines). The structure of an object determines
its behaviour by specifying all the interactions it may undergo. For
example, when you press the button on a vending machine this triggers
the structure to 'give' you an object. The machine is not 'instructed' but
rather triggered to act in accordance with its structure. As mentioned in
the preceding section on operational closure, structure is not a static
thing; rather it alters with interactions. Living systems, however, have
an infinitely greater dynamism or 'plasticity' in their structure, espe-
cially when nervous systems are developed. In dynamic living systems,
the structure is constantly changing. When you move, your structure

98 The Primacy of Semiosis
changes, because the structure is both the components and their rela-
tions.
For Maturana and Varela, structural determinism is in fact a necessary
prerequisite for a scientific explanation. They argue that the central
point of such an explanation is the proposal of a mechanism that gener-
ates the phenomenon you choose to explain: in this case cognition,
defined as effective action (which, they further argue, may under partic-
ular conditions to be examined generate language and self-conscious-
ness).
For something to be a mechanism it must generate the construction
of an entity whose structure (the relations and changes of relations of its
actual components) determines what happens to it. If the system is not a
structure-determined entity, a scientific explanation will not be possible,
because scientific explanation requires a mechanistic experimental
hypothesis. For example, if your car doesn't start when you turn the
ignition key, you assume there is something wrong with the structure of the car,
not your thumb and index finger.
Nevertheless, Maturana claims that, contrary to the prevailing inter-
pretations of both science and philosophy, scientific explanations are
constitulively non-reductionistic. Mechanistic explanations propose a
generative mechanism that gives rise, as a consequence of its operation,
to the phenomenon to be explained, in a different phenomenal
domain from the one in which it (the generative mechanism) operates.
The phenomenon is intrinsically not reducible to the generative mecha-
nism: 'One domain may generate the elements of another domain, but
not its phenomenology which in each domain is specified by the interac-
tions of its elements' (Maturana and Varela 1980, 55).
Maturana argues that phenomena such as language and self-conscious-
ness require an interplay of 'bodyhoods' (bodies) as a generative struc-
ture but do not take place in them. This understanding of scientific
explanation leads away from transcendental dualism. There is relation-
ship, but not reduction of one phenomenon to another. For example,
there is a generative relationship between neurophysiology and behav-
iour, but they occur in different phenomenal domains. Behaviour con-
sists in actions and coordinations of actions that take place in interactions
between organisms and/or their exterior milieu (medium), not in the
organisms themselves. This parallels Deleuze and Guattari's understand-
ing of the subject as occurring in interactions, not in the body.

Autopoiesis and Languaging 99
Maturana (1990, 8) further insists that 'scientific statements are con-
sensual statements valid only within the community of standard observ-
ers that generates them, and science as the domain of scientific
statements does not need an independent objective reality, nor does it
reveal one.'11 This notion of consensual reality will be discussed later in
differentiating Maturana and Varela's position from solipsism and
objectivity or representationalism. The point to bear in mind is that for
Maturana and Varela a scientific hypothesis is necessarily mechanistic
but inherently non-reductionistic, because distinctions are made
between domains or milieux, and what is appropriate to one cannot be
reduced to the other. A phenomenon is not reduced or explained in
more fundamental terms; rather, a generative mechanism is proposed
that gives rise to phenomena occuring in a different phenomenal
domain. This will become clear when we examine Maturana and
Varela's analysis of the generation of language. They will claim that
although language requires the neurophysiology of the participants,
language is not a neurophysiological phenomenon.
Bearing in mind Maturana and Varela's understanding of scientific
explanation, their structural determinism thesis requires further exami-
nation.
PIAGET'S NOTION OF STRUCTURE
Given the widespread use of the terms structure and structuralism in
the humanities (e.g., Levi-Strauss's 'deep structure' of myth, and the
Freudian unconscious as deep structure in psychoanalysis), it is impor-
tant to be clear about the ways in which Maturana and Varela's 'struc-
ture' differs from prevailing notions. The psychologist Jean Piaget
argued that structure can be observed in an arrangement of entities
that embody three ideas: (a) wholeness, (b) transformation, and (c)
self-regulation.
(a) Wholeness means that the constituent parts of an entity have no
independent existence apart from their relations, which determine the
coherence of such an entity (or unity). This appears to conform to Mat-
urana and Varela's notion that there is no such thing as a 'free-floating'
component existing independently of the unity it integrates. Therefore
Maturana and Varela's system is strictly 'closed' in its operations.
(b) Transformation means that the structure is not static but structur-
ing. The structure must be capable of transformational procedures

100 The Primacy of Semiosis
whereby new material is constantly processed by and through it. This
conforms to Maturana and Varela's notion of autopoiesis or self-produc-
tion through a network of processes of production (transformation and
destruction) that produce the components and their relations.
(c) Self-regulation means that the structure makes no appeals beyond
itself in order to validate its transformational procedures. It is self-refer-
ential. This conforms to Maturana and Varela's notion of 'operational
closure' and 'structure determinism.'
However, as explained below in the section on 'structural coupling,'
Varela emphasizes that the nervous system is not to be treated as a decoupled
monad constructing any arbitrary 'reality.' The nervous system is trig-
gered by interactions, but these interactions are not 'inputs'; rather,
they trigger changes of state that lead only to other changes of state in
the system itself. There is an 'operational closure' of its dynamics of
state (defined as a relative balance between neural surfaces). For exam-
ple, 'perception' of colour requires interactions with light, but colour is
not a property of light wavelengths. It is the nervous system itself that
determines colour perception in its operational closure.
APPLICATION IN MATURANA AND VARELA
Thus there is a fundamental concordance between Piaget's notion of
structure and that of Maturana and Varela. However, there are impor-
tant differences between these theorists in their actual application and
use of the term structure (although Varela credits Piaget as an impor-
tant precursor).
Piaget's interpretation of structure as a closed system seems to pre-
vent him from developing the notion of coupling through interactions
that would, in Maturana and Varela's perspective, generate language
and a world of 'objects.' Piaget (and Levi-Strauss) appear to confuse the
brain (biological entity) with language and mind. The 'self = the 'body.'
Maturana and Varela (1987, 234) argue that 'the locus of the dynamics
of mind and consciousness belong to the realm of social coupling.'
Social coupling may be necessary for the generation of language, but it
is not sufficient in itself - the social coupling of many animal worlds
does not produce language. The specific couplings that Maturana and
Varela contend would produce language will be introduced in a later
section.
The notion of structural coupling developed by Maturana and Varela
is thus crucial to understanding their divergence from traditional
notions of structuralism.

Autopoiesis and Languaging 101
Structural Coupling
Structural coupling is Maturana and Varela's description of the relation-
ship between two or more structure-determined entities and the me-
dium in which they exist: 'We speak of structural coupling whenever
there is a history of recurrent interactions leading to the structural con-
gruence between two (or more) systems' (ibid., 75).
The interactions between two or more unities and their medium or
environment consist of reciprocal perturbations that only trigger struc-
tural changes in the two unities respectively - that is, it does not specify
or direct them. Vice versa for the environment. The term 'medium' is
used to emphasize the relational character - there is no separation or
space between an organism (or unity) and its 'environment.' To be
more precise, Maturana distinguishes niche as the part of the medium
operationally defined moment by moment in a unity's encounter with a
medium in structural coupling. A unity specifies the space in which it
exists. An autopoietic system (i.e., one with a dynamic, changing struc-
ture) inevitably evolves in such a way that its structure is effectively cou-
pled to its medium - otherwise it would disintegrate (die). That which
is not structurally coupled to the world in which it exists cannot exist.
This may seem obvious, but structural coupling is necessary for what
Maturana and Varela term cognition - namely, adequate or effective
behaviour. As Maturana says, 'the teacher that determines this fundamen-
tal adequate conduct for us is life. If we remain alive, we have adequate
conduct - whichever way we manage to remain alive.' The most funda-
mental cognition is 'knowing' how to exist.
A structurally plastic autopoietic system endowed with a complex ner-
vous system, such as that of human animals, has a greatly expanded
realm of interactions available to it. These interactions, which are mutu-
ally triggering between organisms and their environment, generate new
phenomena by allowing new dimensions of structural coupling. Mat-
urana and Varela argue that it is structural coupling which forms the
basis of all human and animal systems. If the environment contains
other structurally plastic systems, they will become coupled to one
another as a necessary consequence of their interactions in mutually
triggering changes of state.
Among most social insects, the mechanism of structural coupling
occurs through a chemical coupling called trophallaxis (from the Greek
'flow of foods'). 'There is a continuous flow of secretions between the
members of an ant colony through sharing of stomach contents each

102 The Primacy of Semiosis
time they meet' (ibid., 186). However, such coupling in organisms can
take place through any form of interaction - chemical, visual, auditory,
and so on .
These couplings or interactions form a network of coordinations of
actions, which generate phenomena that an isolated organism could
not generate (e.g., communication and possibly language).
The essence of Maturana's hypothesis is that human beings develop
language collectively in a social domain through recursive coordina-
tions of coordinations of actions (distinctions about distinctions):
'Words are nodes in a network of coordinations of actions between
bodyhoods.' 'Language is not an abstract activity but takes place in the
domain of relations between organisms.' 'Language and bodyhoods are
coupled through the structural interactions that take place in lan-
guage.' (For all these expressions and arguments, see in particular
Maturana 1988, 1990.)
Maturana and Varela have coined the term 'linguallaxis' (a linguistic
trophallaxis) to refer to the coupling in language that is specific to
human beings.12
What is of particular importance is first, that Maturana and Varela
stress that self-consciousness takes place in language in the social
domain: 'In the network of linguistic interactions in which we move, we
maintain an ongoing descriptive recursion which we call the "I." It
enables us to conserve our linguistic operational coherence and our
adaptation in the domain of language' (1987, 231).
Second, we exist as human beings in a consensual domain that is nei-
ther objective nor subjective, but brought forth through our interac-
tions. Solipsism is negated as a problem once we understand that
language is a consensual system of interactions and that objectivity is
constitutively impossible for us as biological creatures bound to our
world of experience. The problem here is that experience seems to
become a collective bubble and that the phenomenological transcen-
dental subject has simply been replaced by the needs and prejudices of
a Wittgensteinian community or 'form of life.' One of the strengths of
Poinsot and Deely's (and Peirce's) semiotic approach is that in recogniz-
ing ontological relations, they do allow for an interface between lan-
guage and things outside language. For Maturana, there are 'no-things'
outside language. Language is a closed domain of recursive consensual
coordinations of actions, and the distinctions we make in language
(such as objects or relations) do not apply outside it. There can never be
a genuine relation or conformity between the objects of experience and

Autopoiesis and Languaging 
103
the things of a prejacent physical environment. As with Kant, the 'episte-
mologically' necessary substratum of our experience is radically
unknowable, and one can say nothing about it (even saying 'it' is to
bring 'it' into language). The excesses of 'savage' deconstruction and
'radical' constructivism surely lie in this tradition. All these excessive
positions arise because of a lack of awareness of the univocal being of
relations.13
Maturana and Varela effectively deny the possibility of objectivity or
truth claims in their analysis. In a consensual or codependent reality
there is no fixed point of reference independent of ourselves that can
give certainty to our descriptions of the world. Maturana, in a manner
similar to Deleuze and Guattari's notion of 'order-words,' asserts that a
claim to objectivity is an operation in the realm of discourse as well as a
demand for obedience. Any claim to objectivity leads the observer to
require a transcendental referent as the ground or source of validation
for the explanations he or she accepts (Maturana 1988, 29).
A more nuanced approach will be suggested in this book whereby
there is a Deleuzo-Guattarian 'truth of the relative' rather than a 'relativ-
ity of truth.' There is as much nature in culture as culture in nature, and
a paradoxical double-individuation of subjects and objects wherein an
autonomous reality forces human animals to describe it in particular
ways. Through such an approach, although we are related to the envi-
ronment by way of a species-specific objective world or Umwelt, we really
do know something about things (like neutrinos) that are irreducible to
phenomenal appearances - they are not just for us but also for themselves
by way of an ontological birelativity or reciprocity or coemergence.
Deely claims that such an approach is already outlined in the work of
Aquinas, Duns Scotus, and particularly Poinsot through the foreground-
ing of signs as univocal relations that can shift unchanged between the
orders of natural and cultural being.
One most striking convergence is between Maturana and Varela's and
Deleuze's conception of Nature as an Individual, composed of all modes
of interaction.14 The environment is not a reservoir of information but a
'plane of consistency' on which individuals (organisms) interact and are
'coupled' together.
Languaging
We are never signifier or signified. We are stratified.
Deleuze and Guattari (ATP, 67)

104 The Primacy of Semiosis
This section focuses on the analyses of language implied by the work of
Maturana and Varela and Deleuze and Guattari, based on the primacy
these thinkers give to multiplicity and its social/cultural stratifications,
and especially in relation to their notions of 'consistency' arising within
multiplicities. Maturana and Varela's theory concerning the generation
of language, and Deleuze and Guattari's criticism of the 'Postulates of
Linguistics,' will be discussed in particular. It will be argued that there is
a striking commensurability between all four men - most importantly,
in their claims that language is directly related to actions in social
domains.
Pragmatics and context become the foundations of language together
with, for example, ethological, ecological, corporeal, and incorporeal
dimensions that cannot be reduced to signifier/signified or cybernetic
informational models, with their emission and reception of signs or
messages. The question for Deleuze and Guattari and Maturana and
Varela is this: How were these 'signs' and their significations generated?
A primary focus of Deleuze and Guattari's work is the analysis of signi-
fying systems or 'regimes of signs,' and how their emergent autonomy
determines the social place and identity of the 'subjects' or participants.
For Varela, the study of emergent properties or self-organization is cru-
cial to an appreciation of the 'manipulative' as well as creative power of
language. An emergent property such as language appears as transcen-
dent to the agents that participate in it; yet the agents themselves,
through their interactions, bring forth this emergent property (Varela
1987).
Deleuze and Guattari and Maturana and Varela emphasize the act of
language rather than its representational or symbolic role. They analyse
language in terms of actions that produce transformations, rather than
in terms of words and things or signifiers and signifieds. These notions
(signifier/signified) occur in the descriptive realm of language and do
not explain, but rather obscure, the nature of language as sets of enun-
ciations and of statements generated in a social field. Deleuze and
Guattari argue that few linguists have paid attention to the social charac-
ter of enunciation (exceptions would be William Labov, Mikhail Bakh-
tin, Michel Foucault, and the speech act theorists). Maturana and Varela
argue in like fashion that language is generated in a social field through
coordinations of coordinations of consensual interactions. Deleuze and
Guattari would add that many - perhaps most - of these coordinations
of coordinations of actions are not consensual in this simple sense, but
are a product of social/cultural forces to which a speaker has to submit.

Autopoiesis and Languaging 105
Compare this with their claim that all language consists of 'order-words'
in two senses: (1) they produce a social order - in this sense they are like
Maturana and Varela's 'consensual' but; and (2) they demand obedi-
ence - they are like commands.
Terry Winograd and Fernando Flores, in their pioneering text on the
design of computer technology (1988), have also drawn attention to the
convergence between speech act theorists and the work of Maturana
and Varela. In the research programs of our four theorists (Deleuze and
Guattari, Maturana and Varela) there is a revisioning of the nature and
function of communication and language. For Maturana and Varela,
notions such as 'universal grammar' and 'signals' and information exist
in the descriptive realm of an observer; they do not refer to actual pro-
cesses taking place in the interaction between an organism and its
medium. They argue that signs in the domain of living organisms pre-
suppose an emitter, a receiver (a message 'transmitted' between them),
and interpretation (coding/decoding); thus the notion of a sign or mes-
sage exists in a system's exterior, descriptive realm in language. That is
to say, it is this that needs to be explained: who determines the accuracy
of the message? Of course, an observer is necessary for any description,
but notions pertaining to the descriptive realm itself (signs, coding,
information, and so on) are not valid when imported into the phenom-
enal domain of the structural dynamics of the nervous system.
Deleuze and Guattari also argue that the notion of signs could be, 'at
the limit,' forgone entirely (ATP, 67). They offer the example of a
genetic code, which can be described without referring to signs. Draw-
ing on the work of the biologist Francois Jacob,15 they argue that the
genetic 'code' 'has neither emitter, receiver, comprehension nor trans-
lation' (ATP, 62). For related but distinct reasons, Maturana and Varela
argue that genes do not contain 'information' that could specify a living
being. It is the network of interactions of the whole cell that constitutes
its provisional totality. The DNA is part of an autopoietic network. Thus
Maturana argues that notions of information transfer or coding, cur-
rently used in relation to cellular reproduction and heredity, do not cor-
respond to any particular process taking place in a cell as an autopoietic
unity.
To recapitulate: For Maturana, the term information (the transmis-
sion of a message from point A to point B), even in the strictly technical
sense of coding, emission, reception, decoding (i.e.: divested of mean-
ing or signification), does not apply in the biology of living systems
because the initial conditions (A) and the so-called end point (B) do

106 The Primacy of Semiosis
not exist as fixed entities but are constantly subjected to structural mod-
ification. These notions exist in a descriptive realm in language, but
only to describe fixed systems - for example telecommunications.
Furthermore, the metaphorical sense of information (as meaning) is
also descriptive and requires an evaluation made by an observer in lan-
guage from a perspective exterior to the system (interacting organisms)
in question. Maturana argues that these notions presuppose an organiza-
tional and structural complementarity, if not identity, between systems
that would make the stability of the signal connoted by the term infor-
mation (or signal) possible.
In engineered systems, such as in telecommunications and computer
design, the structure/organization complimentarity is designed by a
human agent. In biological systems this, of course, is not the case. Any
structure/organization complementarity that exists between organisms
would arise in evolution through a history of consensual interactions
(epigenesis). Information theories as well as signifier theories in linguis-
tic science are descriptive of certain domains but never explanatory.
They do not provide a generative mechanism for the observed regulari-
ties of behaviour among organisms: 'In biological systems such a situa-
tion is the result of phylogenic and ontogenic histories of interactions in
which the selective mutual triggering of structural changes with the con-
servation of the mutual structural coupling (mutual adaptation) of the
involved organisms (or systems) is the mechanism for its origin. Infor-
mational descriptions do not grasp this.' (Maturana 1983, 155).
Maturana and Varela 's Conception of Language
Maturana and Varela propose that the structural coupling of living
organisms with one another and with the medium (external milieu) in
which they exist is the generative mechanism that gives rise to phenom-
ena such as communication and language, which isolated organisms can-
not produce.
Interactions among organisms tend to take on a recursive pattern,
both through sexual reproduction and as a consequence of their exist-
ence in the same milieu.
Maturana and Varela refer to the classic example of social insects
(ants, termites, wasps, and the like) to illustrate structural coupling
involving an entire colony of organisms. The mechanism of coupling
among most social insects occurs through a chemical coupling called
trophallaxis (food sharing), whereby stomach contents are shared. This

Autopoiesis and Languaging 107
results in the distribution throughout the colony of substances (e.g.,
hormones) that determine the differentiation and specification of roles.
For example, the queen is only a queen as long as she is fed in a certain
way. This is also the case for 'barren females,' 'worker females,' 'males,'
and so on.
In organisms with larger, more complex nervous systems such as
mammals, interactions include visual and auditory modes, which allow
for greater flexibility in the behavioural couplings they can engage in.
For example (Maturana and Varela 1987, 190), a wolf pack, whose mem-
bers coordinate their behaviour by adopting different postures, can
hunt and kill a large moose; a single wolf could not do this.
The important point is that these interactions generate phenomena
that isolated individuals cannot produce. Maturana and Varela term this
recurrent coordination of actions 'communication,' which occurs in a
domain of social interactions. Maturana refers to the domain of social
interactions as a 'consensual' or 'linguistic' domain. This linguistic
domain is the basis of language but not yet identifiable with it.
Their extension of the term 'linguistic' to include any mutually gener-
ated, consensual domain of interactions needs to be clearly understood.
When two or more organisms interact recurrently, they generate a social
coupling in which they are reciprocally involved in maintaining their
respective autopoiesis. The coordinated conduct or behaviour that can
be observed among organisms involved in social couplings is the precise
sense that Maturana and Varela give to the term 'communication.' Thus
communication exists in a social field in a flow of interactions, not 'in'
an individual agent.
'Communication' can be instinctive, or it can be acquired in the indi-
vidual life history of an organism (its ontogeny). This acquired or
learned behaviour, they argue, can be described in semantic terms of
'signalling' or meaning, and Maturana and Varela refer to such
acquired behaviour as a 'linguistic domain.' They specifically extend the
term beyond its conventional usage to emphasize that for them, 'human
linguistic behaviours are in fact behaviours in a domain of reciprocal
ontogenic structural coupling which we human beings establish as a
result of our collective ontogenies' (Maturana and Varela 1987, 208).
As in the reformulation of cognition or cognitive acts, their purpose is
to define the notion of communication in terms of adequate or effective
behaviour or actions in the maintenance of autopoiesis, rather than in
terms of symbolic or logical abstractions. The following examples of
acquired 'linguistic' (consensual) behaviour will clarify Maturana and

108 The Primacy of Semiosis
Varela's reformulation of this term and lead to their distinction between
linguistic behaviour and language.
Example 1 of a 'linguistic' behaviour (i.e., acquired behaviour that can
be described in semantic terms).
When my cat comes to the bedroom door each morning, meows, and
runs down to the food bowl, it is possible to describe this behaviour in
semantic terms as the cat 'signalling' to me its desire to eat (i.e., the
metaphoric sense of information). In other words, it is possible to imag-
ine that the 'meaning' of the behaviour determined the behaviour.
Maturana and Varela argue that this semantic description obscures the
mutual coupling of structures that generates the behaviour (and ulti-
mately its explanation by an observer in language).
Example 2: A human observer can describe the barking of sheepdogs
as the conveying of meaning to one another while they are controlling a
flock of sheep. Again, the behaviour can be explained in terms of the
structural coupling of dogs and sheep. The notion of meaning is a
reflective description of behaviour and takes place in language.
In the above two examples the notion of information in its technical
sense remains within the descriptive realm of an observer.
Maturana and Varela argue that the operational coherence or consis-
tency in the above interactions - and in animal communication gener-
ally (e.g., the 'mating' calls or duets of birds) - is based on mutual
structural coupling (the conservation of autopoiesis and mutual adapta-
tion) through structural interactions. For Varela (1979, 268), 'animal
communication is a network of interactions that has no basis except in
its history of coupling and is relative to that history. The signals
exchanged during, say, courtship among birds reflect nothing except
the possibility of the emergence of those coherences.'
What, then, is the distinction between these consensual or 'linguistic'
interactions and the domain of language?
The essence of Maturana and Varela's theory is that in the flow of
recurrent social interactions generated in small groups (fifteen to
twenty members) of bipedal primates moving through the savannah
three million years ago, language began to emerge when the operations
in a 'linguistic domain' resulted in coordinations of actions pertaining
to the linguistic domain itself. That is, language itself is a coordinations of
coordinations of actions. In this process, 'objects' also arise as linguistic dis-
tinctions of linguistic distinctions that obscure the acts they coordinate.
Furthermore, the observer arises as a 'languaging entity'16 by operating
in language with other observers, and generates the 'self as a linguistic

Autopoiesis and Languaging 109
distinction of its participation in a linguistic domain (i.e., a consensual
domain of interactions). For Maturana and Varela, the self is generated
as a fourth order recursive distinction. Basic coordinations are a first-
order linguistic domain (i.e., a domain of coordinations of actions).
'Observing' and 'languaging' are constituted as a second-order recur-
sion in consensual coordinations of actions. The self (fourth-order
recursion) arises through a coordination of a coordination of a coordi-
nation of a coordination of actions. The observer, (third-order) arises
with the distinction of the operational realization of observing in a
bodyhood. Thus, fourth-order recursion is T am observing.'
For Maturana and Varela, the self is a secondary, generated, not gener-
ating, phenomenon of language. Thus, this recursive system entails the
following: basic coordinations (first order), observing (second order),
observer (third order, observing observing), and self-consciousness
(fourth order) - that is, 'the observer distinguishes his or her bodyhood
•I »-r
as a node in a network of recursive distinctions.
What, then, in Maturana and Varela's theory, are coordinations of
coordinations of actions (i.e., second-order recursion)?
The following two examples will illustrate this:
(1) Imagine a dog and his owner out for a walk. They arrive at an inter-
section, and the dog crosses over to the other side ahead. The owner whis-
tles to the dog and points to his side; the dog crosses back over the road,
and the dog and owner continue walking in the new direction.
This is a coordination of coordination of actions. The dog and its
owner have coordinated their actions and moved off in a new direction.
This coordination takes place in the flow of interactions between the par-
ticipants, not in them individually. There is sufficient intimacy and
recurrence of interactions between dog and owner for them to coordi-
nate their actions. For the dog, this is the beginning of a participation in
'languaging'; but the dog does not come to live in language. For human
animals it is possible to become coupled in recursions in consensual
behaviour.
(2) Imagine a person waiting for a taxi. The taxis are passing in the
opposite direction on the other side of the road. In order to hail a taxi
the person makes a circular movement with his arm, the taxi does a U-
turn and pulls up next to the prospective passenger, who gets in.
This is a coordination of coordination of actions.
Maturana and Varela also contend that objects arise as linguistic dis-
tinctions of linguistic distinctions that obscure the acts they coordinate.
The following two examples will illustrate this:

110 The Primacy of Semiosis
(1) The word 'table' is about all the various acts that we may do in
relation to a flat surface that we can put things on. 'Thus, the word
"table" coordinates our actions with respect to the actions we perform
with a "table," obscuring the actions that (as operations of distinction)
constitute the table by bringing it forth' (Maturana and Varela 1987,
210). The essential point here is that we do not just put something on
the table; we can also say 'I am putting something on the table.' The lan-
guage act (linguistic distinction) obscures the domain of acts that the
language acts are about.
The notion of pragmatics and speech act theory, which are in funda-
mental accord with Maturana and Varela's conception of language, is
also developed by Deleuze and Guattari: 'Pragmatics becomes the pre-
supposition behind all of the other dimensions and insinuates itself into
everything' (ATP, 78). 'A statement is the redundant accompaniment of
the act it accomplishes' (Lecercle 1985, 187).18
(2) 'Chalk' (i.e., the distinction of a piece of chalk) is constituted by
the action involved in the use of chalk - that is, writing on a blackboard,
or 'chalking.' 'When I say this is a chalk I coordinate my behaviour with
you in a manner which obscures chalking. Please pass me the chalk -
i.e., pass me chalking' (Maturana, Melbourne seminar, 1991).
Maturana is emphasizing (as does speech act theory),19 that language
is a form of social action directed towards what he calls 'mutual orienta-
tion.' This orientation is not grounded in a correspondence between
'language' and 'the world,' but exists as a 'consensual domain' - as a
flow of interlinked patterns of activity. In the same way, Maturana and
Varela view 'cognition' not as some abstract activity in a mental realm,
but as a pattern of behaviour relevant to the functioning of the person
or organism in its world.20 'Notions such as transmission of information,
symbolization, denotation, meaning or syntax, are secondary to the con-
stitution of the phenomenon of languaging in the living of the living sys-
tems that live it. Such notions arise as reflections in language upon what
takes place in languaging' (Maturana 1990, 39).
Maturana and Varela argue that this recursive coordination of coordi-
nations of actions that constitutes language is specific to human beings
and originated as a result of a particular 'manner of living,' which they
characterize as follows.
Early hominids (approximately three and a half million years ago)
lived in small groups that included males, females, and children. They
were bipedal, and this freed the hands to carry food (besides increasing
tool-making abilities). Food sharing and social bonding (influenced by

Autopoiesis and Languaging 111
the shift to non-seasonal or 'regular' menstrual cycles), together with 'a
more intimate sensual co-existence,' facilitated a manner of living that
provided fertile ground for increased cooperative behaviour (i.e., recur-
rent interactions), to the point that language arose as a coordination of
a coordination of acts. Maturana and Varela suggest from anthropologi-
cal evidence that all of this could have arisen around two and a half mil-
lion years ago. Concomitant with this intimate manner of living in small
groups would be the development of a biology of languaging through
evolution, epigenesis, and the selective advantage of a cooperative man-
ner of living. Maturana argues that transformations to the face and lar-
ynx (among other characteristics) could have occurred in the last three
and a half million years. This brief outline should not be taken to mean
that the genetic code, through 'random' mutation, determines selective
advantage. For Maturana and Varela, the transgenerational conserva-
tion of a particular structural feature is not determined uniquely by the
genetic code, but rather by the autopoietic network in its entirety. They
argue that molecular genetics overemphasizes the role of 'genes.' On a
separate note, current research indicates that genetic structure may be
directly affected by environmental factors (see The New Scientist, 21 Sep-
tember 1991, 20-5).
Maturana and Varela have coined the term 'linguallaxis' (linguistic
trophallaxis - i.e., linguistic 'food sharing') to describe the linguistic
couplings in human societies. In social insects, for example, communi-
cation requires constant physical interaction and mixing of stomach
contents; whereas in human animals the recursive potential of language
commonly allows for communication without constant physical (corpo-
real) interaction. This emergent recursive autonomy of language, which
Varela argues 'is not a mere linear addition' of each agent's acts, is
described by Deleuze and Guattari as 'the superlinearity of language.LL
The essential feature to be grasped in Maturana and Varela's ap-
proach is that although language requires the neurophysiology of
the participants, it is not a neurophysiological phenomenon. Lan-
guage takes place in the flow of consensual coordinations of actions,
not in the bodily materiality of the participants. Maturana empha-
sizes that physiology (i.e., the internal dynamics of the organism) and
behaviour (i.e., interactions with the milieu or other organisms)
occupy different phenomenal domains. Nevertheless, the flow of ac-
tions will trigger structural changes in the bodyhoods of the partici-
pants, and vice versa. In other words, changes in our bodyhoods result
in changes in our interactions, and changes in our interactions result

112 The Primacy of Semiosis
in changes in our bodyhoods. Conversations affect bodies, and bodies
affect conversations.
Thus Maturana argues that phenomena like language, mind, and
ego, and psychic and spiritual phenomena in general, depend on the
operation of our bodyhoods but do not take place 'in' them. They are,
rather, distinctions that an observer makes of the different networks of
conversations - that is, recursive behavioural and physiological cou-
plings in which he or she lives - most importantly, the language net-
works he or she is born into and has to take place within.
These different networks of conversations, in which our bodies are
nodes of operational intersection and words are 'nodes in coordinations
of actions in languaging,' imply what Maturana calls 'multiplicity of
domains of existence.' The 'identity' of a human animal is constituted
as it is realized in his or her participation in a particular network of con-
versations. Thus each human being exists as a configuration of many dif-
ferent temporary 'identities,' which intersect in their realization in his
or her bodyhood. The notion of multiplicity as used by Deleuze and
Guattari is more appropriate than the notion of identity, which suggests
a continuity of sameness as a first principle from which deviations and
changes have to be accounted for. The concept of identity is developed
in a language game. This resonates well with Maturana's multiplicity of
domains of existence.
'Objects' (a term that usually implies this notion of self-identity) are
to be understood in Maturana's theory of language as tokens for the
coordinations of actions that they (qua identical 'objects') obscure.
Objects as self-identity representations arise in language as consensual
coordinations of actions in the recursion of consensual coordinations of
actions that is languaging. The consequence of this analysis is that 'for
living systems that do not operate in language there are no objects, or in
other words objects are not part of their "cognitive domains'" (Mat-
urana 1990, 38). This is to say that organisms not operating in language
in their domain of adequate actions do not distinguish or operate in a
world of objects, but rather are operating in a domain of effector-sensor
correlations that do not operate with a 'representation' of an 'environ-
ment' (Maturana 1980, 26):
The 'visual handling' of an environment is no handling of an environment,
but the establishment of a set of correlations between effector (muscular)
and receptor (proprioceptor and visual) surfaces, such that a particular
state in the receptor surfaces may cause a particular state in the effector

Autopoiesis and Languaging 113
surfaces that brings forth a new state in the receptor surfaces ... and so on.
Behaviour is like an instrumental flight in which the effectors (engines,
flaps, etc.) vary their state to maintain constant, or to change, the readings
of the sensing instruments according to a specified sequence of variations,
which either is fixed (specified through evolution) or can be varied during
the flight as a result of the state of the flight (learning).
Deleuze, in his extraordinary braiding of Spinozist philosophy and
ethology, invokes von Uexkull's illustration of the tick's behaviour as
one example of viewing animal bodies in this way. A body (e.g., a tick) is
defined in terms of its capacity to affect and be affected. The tick oper-
ates not with objects but rather with affective capacities, of which it has
only three: sense of smell, sense of light, and sense of heat (warmth).
The tick 'climbs up a branch' towards the light (it is affected by light),
drops onto a 'passing mammal' that it has recognized by smell, finds a
hairless warm area, and feeds.
For Maturana and Varela and Deleuze and Guattari, this perceptive,
sensing ability does not operate with representations. The tick, like any
organism/animal operating prior to language, does not 'view' anything
in the sense of self-conscious 'imagery.' This is the logical conclusion of
Maturana and Varela's analysis. Yet mainstream biology (as well as most
natural history television programs) continue, to operate on the
assumption that an animal 'views' (consciously) a phenomenal world.
For example, it is assumed that a snake views humans as red objects.22
However, if the snake is not an observer - that is, not existing in lan-
guage — it does not 'view' anything. Eyes are sensing, affective organs,
but the possession of eyes does not imply 'viewing' a world. Roger
Sperry's research23 on 'split brain' patients confirms this. Without lan-
guage, the right brain is not self-conscious of what it 'sees' and cannot
describe what affected it. Maturana cites Sperry's earlier work and his
own experiments to argue that, for example, a frog is not 'aiming' at a
fly when it sticks out its tongue.
For example, an observer notes that a frog shoots out its tongue in
the direction of a fly, and can make the anthropomorphic presumption
that the frog is looking and aiming at that a fly. It is possible to rotate the
eye of a tadpole 180 degrees (keeping intact the optic nerve) and allow
the animal to complete its development. Subsequently, if the rotated eye
is covered and the frog is shown a fly, its tongue goes out and captures it.
However, when the normal eye is covered and the prey is shown to the
rotated eye, the frog shoots out its tongue with a deviation of 180

114 The Primacy of Semiosis
degrees. That is, if the prey is below and in front of the animal, the frog
will now shoot out its tongue backwards and up. This deviation is never
corrected by the animal.
This experiment24 demonstrates that for the frog there is no up,
down, front, or back in reference to an outside world as it exists for the
observer. There is only an internal sensory motor correlation between a
perturbation to the retina and the muscular contractions that move the
frog's body. This is an example of the operational closure of the nervous
system. Maturana argues that such experiments rotate the world of the
observer with respect to the operated animal and that the animal is not
committing a mistake even if it starves to death as a result of never catch-
ing another fly:
Animals that do not live in language cannot be conscious or aware in the
same mannner in which we are conscious or aware when we speak or our
consciousness or awareness as languaging animals. If we speak of body
awareness as we refer to the operation of handling their bodies performed
by non-languaging animals (as the self-cleaning of a wasp), then we also
exhibit a comparable body awareness when we accommodate our position
and movements to the circumstances of our interactions and relations,
when we are not attending (in language) to our doings and we say after-
wards that we acted unconsciously. I claim that animals that do not live in
language do all that they do as we do what we do unconsciously. And I
claim that this is so because they do not have the operationality of language
which makes self-consciousness possible. (1995, 166-7)25
This claim is remarkably close to Heidegger and Deely's approach to
language and 'animality.' The non-languaging animal lives in Umweltbut
does not distinguish it as an Umwelt. The Umwelt is ready to hand but
never present to hand. What is specific to human animal language, as
opposed to animal communication, is the awareness of the external or
ontological relation, as such, 'between' a sign-vehicle and an object signi-
fied. Deely does not go as far as Maturana in denying animals a world of
objects; he does however, argue that they do not grasp the relation of
signification as such that allows for the infinite recursivity, or unlimited
semiosis, that is distinctive of human animal language. The non-lan-
guaging animal is using relations but is not aware of them as relations.
Why is there a fly there when the frog sticks out its tongue? This ques-
tion is answered by Maturana and Varela in accordance with their the-
ory of structural coupling. The frog and the fly belong to the same

Autopoiesis and Languaging 115
history of congruent changes through millions of years, and become
one eating the other in the process of becoming frog and fly. For
Maturana and Varela the nervous system does not compute informa-
tion from an environment; rather, it performs internal correlations that
are triggered by perturbations from its external milieu, or by its own
changes of state. The nervous system is therefore operationally closed -
its current affective ability is determined by a history of interactions.
Bergson calls this habitual recognition 'sensory-motor determinism';
but insofar as there is a brain, and depending on the 'complexity' of
that brain, there is an increasing interval between the perceptual stimu-
lation and the motor response. In human animals the affects and mem-
ory or recollection images operate in this gap and alter the response in
undetermined ways. Deleuze gives an account of Bergson's theory in
Cinema I: The Movement Image (1996).
From an observer's perspective, the action of the fly may not appear
as adequate in conserving its autopoiesis; but if the fly and the frog are
coupled with the biosphere, conceived of as an organism (Gaia) or
second-order, metacellular, autopoietic system, this apparent paradox is
resolved. That is, as observers, we can distinguish the substantial multi-
plicity of which the components (organisms or cells) are a part. When
we isolate things in themselves - such as flies - we obscure the multiplic-
ity they constitute with other components in their interactions. As Bate-
son insisted, the unit of evolution is the organism-and-its-environment.
All living bodies can be viewed in terms of their capacity to be affected
and the affects of which they are capable. In the case of human animals,
these affective capacities are not known in advance. We do not know
what a body is capable of (Spinoza). This perspective avoids the notion
of the organism as a set of preordained functions and opens bodies up
to be understood as the multiplicities they in fact are. What needs to be
investigated are the consistencies or assemblages or relational domains
such bodies can enter.
For a living system not operating in language (e.g., a tick), there is no
inside or outside. Such a distinction arises in language as a particular
consensual coordination of actions in which the participants are recur-
sively brought forth as distinctions of systems of distinctions. It follows
from this argument that the individual (observing, the observer, self-
consciousness) arises in language: 'Furthermore, it also follows from
this that since language as a domain of consensual coordination of
actions is a social phenomenon, self-consciousness is a social phenome-
non, and as such it does not take place within the anatomical confines

116 The Primacy of Semiosis
of the bodyhood of the living systems that generate it; on the contrary, it
is external to them and pertains to their domain of interactions as a
manner of co-existence' (ibid., 39).
For Maturana (as already noted), the term 'consensual' has a techni-
cal meaning that does not presuppose a conscious prior agreement
about conduct. Consensual coordinations of actions refer to the mutu-
ally triggering interlocked conducts that occur when two or more organ-
isms interact recursively, each becoming a medium for the autopoiesis
of the other. Maturana argues that from the perspective of an observer,
such a domain of recursive interactions is indistinguishable from a con-
sensual domain in which the conduct of the structurally coupled organ-
isms is established during the history of their interactions and through
their interactions (co-ontogeny).
Maturana argues further that the interactions of the organisms (e.g.,
the coordinations of conduct among birds through producing a com-
mon song, the melody of which is specific to each couple) can be
described in strictly operational terms without recourse to function or
meaning: 'Yet, when an observer communicates with another observer,
he or she defines a metadomain from the perspective of which a consen-
sual domain appears as an interlocked domain of distinctions, indica-
tions, or descriptions, according to how the observer refers to the
observed behaviour' (Maturana 1978, 48).
Confusion arises if the observer assumes that the consensual domain
operates as a descriptive system intrinsic to the organisms, giving them
information to compute the ad hoc status needed to operate in the
described environment. That is, the observer can assume that the nervous
system of an organism interacts with internal representations (descrip-
tions) of the circumstances of its interactions, as if the changes of state
were determined by the semantic value of these representations: 'Yet all
that takes place in the operation of the nervous system is the structure-
determined dynamics of changing relations of relative neuronal activity
proper to a closed neuronal network' (ibid., 49).
For Maturana the key feature of languaging is that it enables those
who operate in it to describe themselves, thereby generating the self
and its circumstances as linguistic distinctions of the self's participation
in a linguistic domain - that is, a domain of recursive consensual coordi-
nations of actions. Meaning arises as a relationship of linguistic distinc-
tions. Thus, words are distinctions of consensual coordinations of
actions in the flow of consensual coordinations of actions - they are not
symbolic entities - and meaning and languaging become part of the

Autopoiesis and Languaging 117
medium in which the participants exist contingent on the conservation
of the social system.
This is why the term 'consensual' can be misleading if we do not
understand it in its technical use by Maturana as interlocked patterns of
conduct (without prior conscious agreement). Maturana emphasized in
his later work (e.g., Maturana 1988) that social systems are conservative
systems in which power relations operate through obedience:
The normal interactions of a human being in a social system to which he or
she belongs are confirmatory of it and of his or her membership in it, and
contribute to the production of members that confirm it. Social systems
are constitutively conservative systems; due to this, human social systems
can only change if their members have experiences that trigger in them
changes in bodyhood that result in them no longer participating in its con-
stitutive network of conversations. For this to happen in any particular
human social system, its members must have experiences outside the net-
work of conversations that constitutes it. (ibid., 69-70)
We are born into a society or collective assemblage in which change
can only occur through acts which are not confirmatory of it - that is to
say, through dissonant non-consensual acts. It is dissensus,26 not consen-
suality, that generates change: 'This is why social creativity, as the gener-
ation of novel social relations, always entails interactions operationally
outside the society, and necessarily leads to the generation, by the cre-
ative individuals, of modes of conduct that either change the defining
relations of the society as a particular social system, or separate them
from it. Social creativity is necessarily antisocial in the social domain in
which it takes place' (Maturana 1980, xxvii-xxviii).
For Maturana, language is a social phenomenon, and the significance
or meaning of any given behaviour does not occur in the nervous system
or any aspect of the behaviour itself but rather in the ongoing social
process in which it arises. Nietzsche, Foucault, Deleuze, and others have
shown that social processes are always operations of power relations. A
force will always overcome, be overcome, or merge with another force;
there is no equilibrium; consensus is achieved through the operations
of diffuse power relations. We are constrained to consent by regimes of
signs, among other things.
From this perspective, human beings as languaging creatures are
immersed in a network of interactions and language; this network ori-
ents our actions and does not present to us an independent, objective

118 The Primacy of Semiosis
world. In language, worlds are brought forth with others (objects arise in
our cognitive domain) through recursive coordinations of actions that
obscure the acts they coordinate. Reality arises in language as an expla-
nation of the distinction between self and non-self in the praxis of living
of the observer: 'Nature, the world, society, science, religion, the physi-
cal space, atoms, molecules, trees [...] indeed all things are cognitive
entities, explanations of the praxis or happening of living of the
observer [...] Every thingis human responsibility' (Maturana 1990, 51).
Varela, in particular, has drawn attention to the similarity between
postmodern philosophy and the consequences of Maturana and
Varela's understanding of LLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLKKKKKKKKK
cannot be understood as given, assuming a starting point outside first.
Nor is it constructed by us in an arbitrary fashion, assuming a starting
point inside first. There is no fixed point of reference or foundation to
which we can anchor our perceptions, no transcendental reality in
which to ground our beliefs. For Maturana and Varela this view has
important ethical consequences: 'Everything that we do becomes part of
the world that we live as we bring it forth as social entities in language'
(ibid., 51). We are 'autopoietic machines' producing a. world together,
not representing one.
How has the experience of 'self dialogue' arise? Maturana's theory
would answer this question as follows: A nervous system (such as that of
human animals) is capable of generating language and the observer as
the distinction of the operational realization of observing in a body-
hood. This should not be interpreted as overprivileging sight percep-
tion. The recursive operations invoked in generating the 'observer'
apply to the recognition of all our affective capacities. Congenitally
blind people are excellent observers. If observers can orient themselves
towards themselves describing themselves, they can recursively describe
themselves describing themselves endlessly. (In a geometric sense, this
could be likened to the recursive symmetry in a fractal). Language can
occur in the operation of a single human being because 'its structure in
that moment is the result of its participation in a history of languaging
with other organisms' (Maturana 1988, 47). Your language belongs to
an implicit domain of consensual coordinations of actions in which
internal dialogue is, as Varela argues, always in reference to the network
of others that has given rise to you. Or as Maturana puts it: 'What is
peculiar to us is that due to our manner of living in language the distinc-
tion of relations of relations that take place in the flow of languaging

Autopoiesis and Languaging 119
makes it possible that our nervous system should operate inside itself in
the recursive distinctions of relations that constitute the operation in
language and self-consciousness in solitude' (1995, 169).
This does not mean that self-consciousness as a recursive distinction
of relations of relations has now been reduced to a neurophysiological
activity. Once the nervous system has become a recursive languaging
brain, it can generate through its internal dynamics, as a closed net-
work, 'sensory/effector correlations that pertain to the flow of languag-
ing even when the organism that it integrates is alone, or doing nothing
apparent to an external observer' (Maturana, Mpodozis, and Letelier
1995, 24).28 Thus dreams, reflections in solitude, and logical operations
become 'unavoidable possibilities.'
This approach intersects with Deely's argument that ideas as semioti-
cally conceived - that is, as signs or relations - cannot be states of the
nervous system. Neural states are in principle sense-perceptible, but
relations are not. The relational domain or Umwelt is 'suprasubjective'
and potentially intersubjective.
The fundamental difference between Deely and Maturana is that for
Maturana an animal such as the gorilla 'Koko' (q.v. Paterson and Lin-
den 1981) has the possibility of entering into a languaging relational
domain with human animals (not alone), and can do all the fundamen-
tal operations we do in languaging (i.e., coordinations of coordinations
of behaviour). Deely (1982, 203) contends that coordinations of this
kind never constitute what is fundamental to human animal language as
distinct from animal communication (i.e., the awareness of relations as
distinguished from their terms or fundamentals):
Take the case of civil government. Consider the notion of a president - the
president of this country. If I were the Premacks, I would teach my chim-
panzee each time, say, Richard Nixon walked into the room, to put on the
board plastic symbols indicating 'Here comes the President.' Now, if I were
the Premacks, I would forthwith claim that I had taught Sarah or Washoe
or whichever chimp the meaning of the word 'president.' But the fact of
the matter is that the animal doesn't see a president. Indeed, a president, as
such, never appears to the eyes. The chimp doesn't have a clue one as to what
is referred to by the term 'president' as it designates something distinct
and distinguishable from the given concrete individual. When the chimp
associates the word 'president' with R.M. Nixon, and when a human being
says, 'Richard M. Nixon was the President of the United States,' the materi-

120 The Primacy of Semiosis
ally same sound or symbolic marker for 'president' is functioning in a com-
pletely different sense, once above the linguistic interface as well as below
it, the other time below it only.
One of the main focuses of most mystical, shamanic, meditative paths
or 'lines of flight' is to stop or move tangentially to the endless recursive
looping, descriptive, and interpreting process. I, I, I. Deleuze and
Guattari cite Castaneda's books as of 'profound interest' in demonstrat-
ing how to combat - with drugs or other experiences, (e.g., meditative
ones or extreme physical ones - the mechanisms of interpretation: by
'stopping' the internal dialogue. It hardly needs to be emphasized that
such experiences are to be undertaken with caution, lest total self-
destruction occur - drug addiction, paranoia, pathological obsession
with Nirvana or mystical 'union' (as something to be acquired/pos-
sessed). It is said in the Ratnavali (an ancient Buddhist text): 'A foolish
and intellectually conceited person, because he misunderstands devoid-
ness, destroys his own person by rejecting it and plunges headfirst into
the hell of Avici.'29 In more contemporary language, Maurice Blanchot,
in commenting on Foucault, has stated that it is not a question of elimi-
nating the subject but of putting into question its 'overdetermined'
unity.
What remains extraordinary is that such a putting into question or
'decentring' of the subject should be considered radical or a purely con-
temporary strategy. This demonstrates the extraordinary power of the
constraints to consensus as well as their fragility.
A human being reared in complete isolation does not develop lan-
guage (q.v. Maclean 1977). Likewise, the isolation of a 'languaging
adult' (e.g., Robinson Crusoe) over an extended period will tend to pro-
duce a deterioration in the ability to operate in language - unless substi-
tutes for social interaction are invented. Thus Crusoe throws himself
into work and order, schedules, time keeping, and so on, in a search for
substitutes for social interactions. (See Deleuze 1990, 301-21, for a com-
mentary on Michel Tournier's novel Friday. Tournier's novel is inspired
by the Crusoe story but develops a 'perverse world without others.') In a
striking analysis, Deleuze argues that the perceptual field could not
function as it does without the Other, understood as an organizing prin-
ciple rather than as an individual subject. That is to say, laws affecting
the constitution of objects (e.g., form background), depend on the
Other as a structure, not as a particular form inside a perceptual field:
'The part of the object that I do not see I posit as visible to Others, so

Autopoiesis and Languaging 121
that when I will have walked around to reach this hidden part, I will
have joined the Others behind the object ... As for the objects behind
my back, I sense them coming together and forming a world, precisely
because they are visible to, and are seen by Others. When one com-
plains about the meanness of Others, one forgets this other and even
more frightening meanness - namely the meanness of things were there
no Other (ibid., 305-6).
Deleuze and Guattari 's Conception of Language
Recursivity of actions is necessary for language, and this in turn requires
affective capacity - an ability to affect and be affected - to act and be
acted upon: 'The phenomena of self-referentiality cannot account for
the performative. The opposite is the case; it is "the fact that certain
statements are socially devoted to the accomplishment of certain ac-
tions" that explains self-referentiality' (ATP, 78). This is in agreement
with Maturana and Varela's thesis, outlined earlier.
An essential feature of Maturana and Varela's analysis of language is
that symbols do not pre-exist language but arise after it, and in it, as dis-
tinctions made by an observer of consensual relations of coordinations
of coordinations of actions. They argue that the understanding of lan-
guage as a denotative symbolic system for the transmission of informa-
tion requires the pre-existence of the function of denotationLLLLLL
this function is the very one whose evolutionary origin should be explainedLL.
Deleuze and Guattari, elaborating partly on Austin's31 speech act the-
ory, begin their criticism of linguistics from similar observations: 'Aus-
tin's famous theses that there are intrinsic relations between speech and
certain actions that are accomplished by saying them - e.g., the performa-
tive: I swear by saying "I swear"! The utterance constitutes an act. The
illocutionary: I ask a question by saying "Is..."?' These non-discursive
immanent relations between statements and acts have, for Deleuze and
Guattari, three important consequences:
(1) [They] made it impossible to conceive of language as a code, since a
code is the condition of possibility for all explanation. [Deleuze and
Guattari substitute Forms of Expressions and Forms of Content.]
(2) [They] made it impossible to define semantics, syntactics, or even pho-
nematics ... independently of pragmatics.
(3) [They] made it impossible to maintain the distinction between lan-
guage (la langue) and speech (la parole) ... The meaning and syntax of

122 The Primacy of Semiosis
language can no longer be defined independently of the speech acts they
presuppose. (ATP, 77)
The relation between Maturana's conception of language and
Deleuze and Guattari's extension of speech act theory is not delineated
in order to develop a unified theory but rather to emphasize the ele-
ments of the tradition they criticize. The major criticism of traditional
linguistics is that it ignores the act of language and concentrates on its
syntax and semantics, thus closing language in upon itself and making
pragmatics a 'residue': 'Signifier enthusiasts take an oversimplified situ-
ation as their implicit model: word and thing. From the word they
extract the signifier, and from the thing a signified in conformity with
the word and therefore subjugated to the signifier. They operate in a
sphere interior to and homogeneous with language' (ATP, 6).
For Deleuze and Guattari (as for Maturana and Varela), language is
derived from interactions on a 'plane of consistency' that links autono-
mous elements, (e.g., organisms). The consistency of the plane is in the
relations or interactions, not in subjects or forms (in the traditional sense).
Multiplicities are not reducible to unities. In Maturana's terms, lan-
guage occurs in the coupling or flow of consensual coordinations of
actions, not in the bodily materiality of the participants. Observing, the
observer, and self-consciousness arise as respectively second-, third-, and
fourth-order recursions in coordinations of actions.
The challenge and difficulty in engaging with Deleuze and Guattari's
analysis of language theories is that it is embodied within a text (ATP)
whose style and manner of construction seeks to express a way of think-
ing that abandons all traditional academic divisions and linear, step-by-
step explanations. They invent and multiply concepts in an attempt to
convey a real feeling for the multidimensional complexities, coher-
ences, and consistencies among what they call the 'strata' of the earth.
These strata correspond, basically, to the physicochemical, organic, and
anthropomorphic (human) levels. Deleuze and Guattari characterize
and examine the interrelationships of these 'strata' in a unique way that
they describe as rhizomatic or nomadic. In a technical sense, rhizomes
are underground root systems that grow in a horizontal rather than an
arborescent, vertical manner. The shoots that do push through the sur-
face are not independent of this maze of underground 'plagiotropic'
(running at a slant to the plant) growth.32 This is playfully in contrast to
the tree model so beloved of Chomsky and many other linguists.
Deleuze and Guattari use this image of the rhizome to connote a man-

Autopoiesis and Languaging 123
ner of investigation that recognizes the fundamental importance of
interconnections and couplings. They argue that there is no language
in itself, nor is there a functional separation between syntax and seman-
tics and the social field from which these emerge.
This examination of Deleuze and Guattari's criticisms of linguistics
and their complementarity and consistency with Maturana and Varela's
conception of language presumes to do no more than indicate to the
reader the extraordinary depth and richness of A Thousand Plateaus. As
indicated, its manner of construction does not facilitate conventional
manners of exegesis, and with that consideration borne in mind let us
attempt to stroll through the strata, focusing on the emergent auton-
omy of language and its constraining and creative power in the human
world:
The same Professor Challenger who made the earth scream with his pain
machine, as described by Arthur Conan Doyle, gave a lecture after mixing
several textbooks on geology and biology in a fashion befitting his simian
disposition. He explained that the earth - the Deterritorialized, the Gla-
cial, the giant Molecule - is a body without organs. This body without
organs [or plane of consistency] is permeated by informed, unstable mat-
ters, by flows, in all directions, by free intensities or nomadic singularities,
by mad or transitory particles. (ATP, 40)
Strata occur on this body without organs (e.g., through dissipative
structures and autopoiesis), giving form to matter and organizing mole-
cules into molar aggregates. The organic and anthropomorphic strata
are the concern of this section. Using the terms 'content' and 'expres-
sion' taken from the linguist Louis Hjelmslev (as an alternative to the
signifier/signified model in structural linguistics), Deleuze and
Guattari's analysis proceeds to examine the organization of matter (the
unformed, non-stratified plane of consistency) through its 'double artic-
ulation' of content and expression. For Deleuze and Guattari this
approach has the advantage of breaking with the form-content duality.
There is a form of content, and there is a form of expression. Further-
more, there is a substance of content and expression. Consider an
example.33
The substance of content of a. high school is the students. The form of con-
tent is, the school itself, its architecture, and so on. The form of expression is
the administrative rules and traditions that determine how the school is
laid out and what it does (teaches/inspires/moulds). The substance of

124 The Primacy of Semiosis
expression is the phonemes and letters embodying those functions. The
crucial issue is 'who' determines what happens in the school (its form of
expression)? It will become apparent that the subject of this expression
is the interactions among people rather than anything 'in' one person's
'mind.' That is (using Deleuze and Guattari's terminology), the subject
consists in a collective assemblage of 'enunciation' operating in a social
field. Deleuze and Guattari argue that these terms (content/expres-
sion) offer a richer understanding than can be provided by signifier/
signified relationships or form and substance. Whereas form and sub-
stance are not really distinct, content and expression can have an auton-
omy in their double articulation in the organic stratum. How can this
autonomy of expression be characterized?
In the organic stratum, expression becomes linear rather than volu-
minous. The essential thing is the linearity of the nucleic sequence.
Thus, for example, in the crystalline stratum, the crystal form
expresses a microscopic structure. However, the distinction is only 'for-
mal,' as between scales or orders of magnitude. In the organic stratum
the distinction between content and expression becomes 'real' rather
than formal. The linearity of the nucleic sequence is not that of an
order of magnitude (or three-dimensionality); rather, it is 'unidimen-
sional,' and expression develops an autonomy (or 'deterritorialization')
from content with the consequence that there is now a mechanism for
reproduction: 'The crystal's subjection to three dimensionality, in other
words, its index of territoriality, makes the structure incapable of for-
mally reproducing and expressing itself; only the accessible surface can
reproduce itself, since it is the only deterritorializable part' (ibid., 60).
In the anthropomorphic or human stratum, form of expression
'becomes linguistic rather than genetic' and achieves a further deter-
ritorialization: 'Vocal signs have temporal linearity, and it is this su-
perlinearity that constitutes their specific deterritorialization and
differentiates them from genetic linearity' (ibid., 62). The phenomenon
of translation (from one language to another) becomes possible, as
form of expression is now independent from substance of expression.
Deleuze and Guattari contend that independence of form of expression
from its substance does not occur on the other strata. They draw on a
staggering range of anthropological and biological works to character-
ize the manner of living and changing biology that would facilitate this
'superlinearity' or 'deterritorialization' and development of language.
The substance of expression in language (phonemes) affects the
whole configuration of the face (as Maturana argues), and neotenic

Autopoiesis and Languaging 125
birth (requiring extended nursing) facilitates language learning: 'The
steppe, once more seems to have exerted strong pressure for selection:
the 'supple larynx' is a development corresponding to the free hand
and could have arisen only in a deforested milieu' (ibid., 62).
Comparative Assessment
Thus, both in Maturana and Varela and in Deleuze and Guattari the bio-
logical/social conditions that could generate language are given due
emphasis without this being a reductive hypothesis. The phenomenon
of language arises in the phenomenal domain of interactions, not in the
body. However, the body is affected by these interactions due to the
recursive coupling of behaviour and neurophysiology.
The 'superlinearity' of language corresponds to the second-order
recursion in coordinations of coordinations of acts. Maturana and
Varela argue that this arose somewhere between two and three-and-a-
half million years ago as a result of a manner of living involving 'inti-
mate sensual coexistence' and a recurrence of social interactions and
bonding such that this recursion in coordinations was liable to occur.
The period noted here is based on fossil remains indicating that the
structural features of present-day human animals (e.g., bipedalism,
opposing thumb, omnivorous feeding habits) cannot be recognized
prior to this period. Furthermore, Maturana and Varela argue that such
a manner of living implies mutual acceptance of others in coexistence,
and that without this mutual acceptance there can be no social process
and increasing recurrence of interactions. They argue that this mutual
acceptance is generated by the emotion of 'love' as a 'biological phe-
nomenon:' 'When I speak of love I do not speak of a sentiment, nor do I
speak of goodness, nor recommend kindness. When I speak of love I
speak of a biological phenomenon, I speak of the domain of actions in
which living systems coordinate their actions in a manner that entails
mutual acceptance, and I claim that such operations constitute social
phenomena' (Maturana 1988, 56).
Maturana and Varela are claiming that man is fundamentally an ethi-
cal animal and that anything which blocks or destroys this mutual accep-
tance, such as ideological or religious convictions, destroys social
phenomena. Furthermore, they argue that since language is generated
in a social context through interactions with others in coexistence, and
since our 'reality' or 'world' is constructed by the distinctions we make
in language, every languaging act has an ethical meaning because it

126 The Primacy of Semiosis
constitutes or 'brings forth' a world. In his preface, Michel Foucault
described Deleuze and Guattari's Anti-Oedipus as a book of ethics con-
cerned with an art of living that would counteract fascism: - The fas-
cism in us all, in our heads and in our everyday behaviour, the fascism
that causes us to love power, to desire the very thing that dominates and
exploits us.' There is thus an ethical foundation to the work of all four
of these thinkers.
Until recently, Maturana and Varela focused their research on the
biological origins of cognition, perception, and language and paid little
attention to the constraining power of language as a form of expression
generated in a social field. Theorists in the humanities such as Foucault
and Deleuze and Guattari have offered highly detailed accounts of the
constraining force of language, within which we are born.34 Neverthe-
less, Maturana is today studying culture (defined by him as a particular
network of conversations and the actions or doings implicit in them) -
specifically, the rise of patriarchy as a culture of oppression. In the
humanities, the term 'discourse' (or 'episteme,' after Foucault) corre-
sponds to Maturana's network of conversations. He sees this network as
intimately connected with the transition from a nomadic to a pastoral
(herding) lifestyle during which defence and appropriation, beginning
with the restriction of mobility of animals and their enclosure, led to a
more general change in the manner of living. This change was charac-
terized fundamentally by the importance given to procreation in the
herd and by the displacement of the notion of fertility onto that of pro-
creation. This work will not be further examined here, except to note
Maturana's involvement in 'cultural' questions concerning the relation-
ship between the state and nomadic lifestyles, which are also a central
concern of A Thousand Plateaus. These issues, which are intrinsically
bound up in languaging and discourse, are the subject of a highly origi-
nal and complex treatment by Deleuze and Guattari, which, again, will
not be further examined here (see ATP, 'Treatise on Nomadology - The
War Machine').
The critical point for Deleuze and Guattari is that few linguists have
studied the social character of enunciation. They argue that statements
are individuated only to the extent that an 'impersonal collective assem-
blage' requires it. They extend pragmatics by arguing that the subject is
not the origin, but only the mouthpiece for an utterance. One's speech
is always an instance of indirect speech: 'Direct discourse is a detached
fragment of a mass and is born of the collective assemblage, but the col-
lective assemblage is always like a murmur from which I take my proper

Autopoiesis and Languaging 127
name, the constellation of voices, concordant or not from which I draw
my voice' (ibid., 84).
For the Deleuze and Guattari of ATP, the elementary unit of language
is the 'order-word' - the relation of every word or statement to implicit
presuppositions (speech acts) that are accomplished in the statement
(e.g., I swear by saying 'I swear'). They extend the theory of the perfor-
mative sphere developed in speech act theory by viewing the subject, T,'
as derived from collective assemblages. The 'subject' becomes a symbi-
otic node within social interactions.
Order-words are social in origin; they are expressed words but not
reducible to them. They are concerned not merely with commands, but
with every statement that entails some kind of social obligation (e.g.,
promises, affirmations, negations - 'You are no longer a child').
These order-words (or 'statement-acts') do not arise from 'intersub-
jectivity,' as subjectivity presupposes the coupling of bodies in a social
field, which itself generates subjectivity (Maturana and Varela's consen-
sual or linguistic domain). Deleuze and Guattari analyze this coupling
as already foreshadowed, in terms of content and expression as applied
to collective assemblages that take two basic forms: a 'machinic assem-
blage,' which couples bodies, actions, and passions (content); and a
'collective assemblage of enunciation or regime of signs' (expression).
Bodies are coupled through a machinic assemblage (not unlike Mat-
urana and Varela's structural coupling) that generates corporeal or
structural changes in the bodies of the assemblage; and 'instantaneous
incorporeal transformations' are generated through the collective as-
semblage of enunciation in its speech- or statement-acts. Examples
include the judge's verdict, which instantaneously transforms the
'accused' into 'guilty'; the T do' of marriage; and the awarding of a
diploma at a graduation ceremony. All are instantaneous incorporeal
transformationsLLLLLLKKKKKIIJHJJHJJKKJKIKKKLLDDDFGGGD
through speech acts generate structural changes in the bodies of
the participants. The 'meanings' or 'significations' or 'expressed' of
statement-acts can dramatically affect bodyhoods. They are instanta-
neous, and they trigger changes in physiology as a result of the coupling
between the domain of language acts and the bodyhoods of the partici-
pants. 'Words' can kill, depress, or inspire.
All of this conceptual innovation highlights the inadequacy of signi-
fier/signified or word/thing relationships. Collective assemblages oper-
ate through a complex interrelationship between states of things and
statement-acts (which are not reducible to words).

128 The Primacy of Semiosis
This understanding leads Deleuze and Guattari to argue that lan-
guage is neither informational nor communicational; rather, it effectu-
ates acts (e.g., ordering, questioning, promising, affirming).
Using different strategies, all of these thinkers affirm that language is
not fundamentally informational. For Maturana, notions such as infor-
mation arise in language as reflections and are secondary to what takes
place in languaging (i.e., coordinations of acts). Interactions do not
take place in a domain of abstractions, but in what Deleuze would call
the 'co-functioning' or symbiosis of 'bodies,' which may be physical or
social or verbal.
Maturana contends that the traditional view of language as a denota-
tive symbolic system for transmitting information concerning indepen-
dent entities has obscured the fact that such a conception assumes the
pre-existence of the function of denotation, whereas denotation is the
very function that requires explanation in an evolutionary theory of natural
languages. For Maturana, language must arise as a result of something
that does not require denotation. Denotation requires consensus, and
for him it is the process of structural coupling that generates a consen-
sual domain of interactions. He argues that language is connotative, ori-
enting the orientee within his cognitive domain (i.e., domain of
adequate or effective LLLLLLLLLLLLLLJHJHHGGHHJGHHGHG
information between organisms except in a metadomain as an a posteri-
ori commentary made by an observer. In other words, notions such as
information and the rules of syntax and generative grammar (Chomsky)
are descriptions within the cognitive realm of the observer and have no
explanatory value when it comes to the actual machinic operation of liv-
ing autopoietic systems.
Autopoietic systems parallel Deleuze and Guattari's notion of abstract
machines and their concrete realization in machinic assemblages: 'It is
still the same abstract animal that is realized throughout the stratum,
only to varying degrees, in varying modes ... only autonomous realisa-
tions of the same abstract relations' (ibid., 46). Maturana and Varela
define the 'organization' of a machine as relations between components
regardless of the components themselves. These relations (not the com-
ponents) constitute the 'abstract machine,'36 which is effectuated or
embodied in 'machinic assemblages' (Maturana and Varela's structure):
'An assemblage is necessary for organisms to be caught within and per-
meated by a social field that utilises them' (ibid., 71).
To recapitulate: the unformed (although not 'chaotic') plane of consis-

Autopoiesis and Languaging 129
tency becomes 'stratified' through the action of an abstract machine,
which actualizes its abstract relations on a specific stratum through par-
ticular machinic assemblages: 'Thus there is no vital matter specific to
the organic stratum, matter is the same on all the strata. But the organic
stratum does have a specific unity of composition, a single abstract Ani-
mal, a single machine embedded in the stratum, and presents every-
where the same molecular materials, the same elements or anatomical
components of organs, the same formal connections' (ibid., 45).
Maturana and Varela likewise insist that the organic stratum is de-
fined by a particular organization (i.e., in terms of relations, not com-
ponent properties) rather than by some 'vital' force. Paradoxically,
reductionistic explanations (e.g., in terms of genetic structure) are,
according to Maturana and Varela, vitalistic, in that they confer all the
properties of the living onto one or some of its components. Thus
molecular genetics (a la Jacques Monod) becomes a vitalistic expla-
nation of living systems, emphasizing one component rather than re-
lationships. Jacques Monod, one of the most influential contemporary
cellular biochemists, argues that the properties of a living system can be
reduced to the properties of the amino acid sequences of polypeptide
chains: 'It is at this level of chemical organisation that in a very real
sense lies, if there is any, the secret of life' (Monod 1971, 94).
Maturana and Varela emphasize that autopoiesis, the organizing prin-
ciple of living systems, is not a transcendent notion but refers to the spe-
cific relations that define an autopoietic system. Yet, these relations do
not identify particular mechanisms in the organism. The organization
of autopoiesis is actualized in a particular living system, on a plane of
consistency that is pre-individual but not transcendent.
Autopoietic living machines (abstract animals) are coupled through
their recurrent interactions on this plane. In fact, Deleuze and Guat-
tari's notion of consistency is influenced by the work of Eugene Dupreel
(1968), a virtually unknown French philosopher who sought to develop
a philosophy of biology in the 1930s and 1940s based in part on the
notions of'consolidation' and 'consistency' (q.v. ATP, 328-9): 'The con-
sistency of a being is the capacity to conserve its identity throughout the
vicissitudes that result from its relationships with other beings' (Dupreel
1968,18).
Maturana and Varela (1987, 74) state this principle as follows: 'Ontog-
eny is the history of structural change in a unity without loss of organisa-
tion (identity) in that unity.'
Organisms become bound up with one another through the 'consoli-

130 The Primacy of Semiosis
dation' of their coexistence in what Deleuze and Guattari call a machinic
opera (ATP, 330), and what Maturana and Varela call 'a structural dance
in the choreography of co-existence' (Maturana and Varela 1987, 248).
For the abstract machine (autopoietic system) to endure, it must be
coupled in congruent recurrent interactions with a medium in which it
retains its autonomy (through changes of state/structure which con-
serve its organization, that is, through structural coupling). If these
interactions are not congruent, the autonomy of the autopoietic ma-
chine disintegrates.
The plane of consistency (or abstract machine) becomes 'stratified'
by the actualization of machinic arrangements that express 'consistency'
through their own autonomous functioning as well as through congru-
ent couplings in which consistency is conserved. In fact, the plane of
consistency is simultaneously constituted by the following: unformed
elements, intensive affective capacities, and immanent formal relation-
ships, which 'emerge' as autonomous systems through, for example, dis-
sipative structures and autopoietic living machines. If this appears to be
'fuzzy KKKKKKKKKHJHJJHJHHHJJHJGUYUUHJHHHHHJHHHH
these 'consistent' autonomous autopoietic systems are actualized gener-
ates consensual worlds (a multiverse rather than a universe) wherein
languages (as consensual coordinations of coordinations of actions)
develop their own emergent autonomy and wherein 'regimes of signs'
become descriptive media that can manipulate and transform bodies
through signification and incorporeal transformations.
However, this autonomy of languages is also creative, allowing its par-
ticipants to describe, imagine, and conjure up the past and invent the
future. Order-words may constrain and determine subjectivity, in partic-
ular as one is born into regimes of signs. However, there is always the pos-
sibility of unpredictable encounters and novel interactions leading to
previously unimagined observations, statement-acts, and networks of
conversations:
If a human being can observe the social system that he creates with his
behaviour, he may dislike it and reject it, and thus become a source of
change; but if he can only undergo interactions specified by the social sys-
tem that he integrates, he cannot be an observer of it and his behaviour
can only confirm it. Accordingly, all coercive political systems aim, explic-
itly or implicitly, at reducing creativity and freedom by specifying all social
interactions as the best means of suppressing human beings as observers

Autopoiesis and Languaging 131
and thus attaining political permanence. To obtain this ultimate goal, how-
ever, the typically human mode of creativity must be completely sup-
pressed, and this, as long as there is any capacity to establish such second-
order consensual domains as the use of language requires, is impossible.
(Maturana 1978, 62)
The Achilles heel of absolute domination = relations.

This page intentionally left blank 

Conclusion
Just as an artist borrows from his precursors and contemporaries the traits which
suit him, I invite those who read me to take or reject my concepts freely. The
important thing is not the final result but the fact that the multicomponential
cartographic method can co-exist with the process of subjectivation, and that a
reappropriation, an autopoiesis, of the means of production of subjectivity can
be made possible.
Guattari (1995, 12-13)
Only logically is being prior to and presupposed by action: existentially, a being
is only so long as and through the actions (and resulting relationships) it enter-
tains, both actively and passively, with its surroundings, whether objective or
physical. Hence also only logically do structures 'exist' apart from actions. They
exist only as virtualities of the action itself which sustains being, and — especially
- as the pattern of relations resulting from those virtualities as sustenative.
Deely (1994c, 1)
To fail to recoil at the relational limit is to risk becoming philosophical.
Massumi (2000, 195)
The account of relations that has been presented in the foregoing pages
moves inexorably from ontological, to ethological, to semiotic, ethico-
aesthetic, and political dimensions. To speak or write about relations is
to inevitably have forced upon oneself the problem and question of what
relations we might wish to be involved in. This is not to suggest that we
can simply pick and choose at will, but that there is an ethical imperative
to take responsibility for our actions and experiment with the kinds of

134 The Primacy of Semiosis
worlds we wish to enter into with others. What kind of cosmopolitics, or
manner of coexistence, do we want - and with whom and what crea-
tures, things, and hybrids? Thus a continuum or transversality from
theory to practice to action becomes ontologically inevitable.
I claim no special originality for this observation, which forced itself
on me while I was engaging with the materials that comprise this book.
What is more, this claim is quite explicit in Deleuze and Guattari's work.
Guattari especially emphasizes the ethico-aesthetic and political conse-
quences of his 'schizoanalytic cartographies.' He never stops repeating
that subjectivity is not a natural given, but has to be constructed -just
like a new molecule or entity of any kind - and that the 'three ecologies'
of the mental, the environmental, and the social interpenetrate.
As examples, Guattari refers to the most diverse and often low-profile
tentatives, such as the manner in which a retirement home is run, or the
kitchen in a mental hospital. In fact, there are an infinite number of
examples, from education to so-called 'personal relations'; and as
Guattari observed through his work as a therapist and activist, this reap-
propriation of autopoiesis or creative autonomy in one domain can
catalyse a recovery of creativity in other, unforeseen domains.
To avoid misunderstanding, I would emphasize that this question of
ethico-political practice is not by any means the only one at issue. As I
have tried to suggest, the univocal ontology of relations presented to us
by Poinsot seems to have extraordinary resonances with Deleuze's logic
of sense, in particular the concept of an 'outside' of thought that is not
the outside of an external world but rather the externality of relations
that allow thought to have a relation with something that does not
depend on it. Relations are external to their terms, and the issue is not
primarily a relation of thought to the external world but rather the rela-
tion of thought to something other than itself.
As Zourabichvili (1996, 31) notes so magnificently, for Deleuze (and
Guattari) 'things' involve a concept offeree, and things are first of all
signs that refer (renvoyer) to something other than themselves - they refer to
the force they manifest or express. Thus things have no traditional
essence. The 'essence' becomes a nexus or pattern of relations, and phi-
losophy becomes a semiotic that treats things first of all as signs of rela-
tions and forces. A phenomenon is reduced to a thing when it is no
longer grasped as a sign. Coupled with this semiotic is the 'truth of the
relative' wherein both the subject and the object are involved in a dou-
ble individuation. The world is not identical to itself, but changing, and
we are changing with it (the exit from the Kantian horizon). This

Conclusion 135
involves a perspectivism which is not that of a point of view on neutral
things (the relativity of truth), but a perspectivism in which the point of
view also belongs to the object, and the identity of the object as seen by
a seeing subject vanishes into difference, which refers to other differ-
ences that differentiate it. Difference replaces identity ... Every object,
every thing, must see its own identity swallowed up in difference, each
being no more than a difference between differences. 'Difference must
be shown differing,LLLLLJHHHHIUHGGHHGHJHHHGGHGGHHGHGHGHGHGHJHJHJJ
riority of perspectives beyond the relative exteriority of the represented
world to a subject, or the relative exteriority of external things in rela-
tion to one other - an absolute 'outside' which is not that of an external
world but of the exteriority (and univocity) of relations to their terms. It
is this capacity of relations that allows thought to go beyond recognition
or representation and encounter the unknown or non-thought - to cre-
ate a little genuine novelty. And what does thought encounter that
forces it to think? Signs (which, as we have seen, are relations). All
thought is 'in' or by way of signs.
So what? Or where to from here?
There are a many interesting directions in which this autosemiopoie-
sis can be taken:
First, the practice of a generalized ecology, which includes an ecology of
the virtual as much as the visible world, and which seeks to engender
new formations and alliances that would allow for mutual flourishing
and preservation (a la Spinoza and Deleuze). As Guattari boldly claims
(1996, 107) 'these alternative forms of existential reappropriation and
self-valorization may in the future become the reason for living for human
collectivities and individuals who refuse to give in to the deathlike
entropy characterizing the period we are passing through.' Of course, it
need hardly be mentioned that the living hell that millions of people
have had forced upon them requires that assistance must often come from
others.
The current work of Bruno Latour and Isabelle Stengers provides
valuable material and examples of conceptual work with practical and
ethical applications. Latour's 'political ecology' and Stenger's 'cosmo-
politics' are complementary and raise fundamental ethical and political
questions. 'Who or what do you take into account?' 'At what price are
you ready to live the good life together?' Latour sometimes refers to this
approach as a 'relationism' or 'the truth of relations.' Both these writ-
ers, educators, and 'activists' draw significantly on the work of Alfred
North Whitehead, a philosopher who has also influenced Deleuze and

136 The Primacy of Semiosis
Guattari. It is symptomatic of the state of contemporary mainstream aca-
demia that Whitehead's work is largely ignored today. This is not to sug-
gest that we should all become 'Whiteheadians,' but rather that a
creative use of his concepts (such as 'event,' 'proposition,' and 'actual
occasion') provides an ontological breath of fresh air.
For the record, it is worth noting that Latour brilliantly revitalizes
Whitehead for his own uses and that Stengers recently published a
book on Whitehead's 'philosophy of organism,' Penser avec Whitehead
(2002), in which she claims that Guattari's twin autopoietic folds, briefly
developed in Chaosmosis (1995), repeat the Whiteheadian process of
actualization.
Now this is interesting, because Whitehead sought to develop a logic of
relations in which the ultimate entities are complexes of relations or
overlapping series of events. Whitehead's 'reformed subjectivist princi-
ple' takes an approach quite consonant with that of Poinsot and Deely.
He insists that relations are real (although this is not yet to have grasped
the univocal status of relations), and he specifically engages with the
opposition between Bradley and Russell on internal versus external rela-
tions. In fact, he argues in his serial pluralism that an actual occasion is
internally related to its antecedents through 'prehension,' but that its
completed antecedent occasions are not internally related to it. In this
approach, external relation seems to denote no relation at all, and it
remains unclear to me (and to Ivor Leclerc in The Nature of Physical Exist-
ence [1972]) whether Whitehead has in this way satisfactorily dealt with
the problem of relations. Specifically, to what extent is prehension really
a relation? Deely has suggested that Whitehead's prehension is a 'con-
fused' form of transcendental relation - that is, a relative being, but not
a relation. What is nevertheless supremely relevant is that relations are a
crucial problem for Whitehead (as for the history of philosophy). How-
ever, here we are more concerned with the task of creating new relations
than with clarifying their ontological status.
A most striking avenue for active and activating ethico-aesthetic and
political engagement is the extraordinary intersection between the con-
cerns of Poinsot, Deely, and Deleuze and Guattari, and the work of the
contemporary Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben, together with the
work of Alliez, Stengers, Latour, and Negri and colleagues (as it now
becomes articulated byway of the French journal Multitudes).1
What is fascinating about Agamben's work as a stimulus to ethico-
aesthetic and political action is his progression from an account of
medieval logic and scholastic meditations on signification and language

Conclusion 137
to ethico-political conclusions concerning the state and the individual.
For example, in Potentialities (1999) we find an account of intentionality
that corresponds exactly with Deely's approach in New Beginnings
(1994a). What is more, we find a brilliant essay on Deleuze, Guattari,
and the concept of 'absolute immanence'; references to Gregory of
Rimini; and, in The Coming Community (1993), even a reference to Jakob
von Uexkull's Umwelt theory concerning the status of the singularity,
'being-thus' or 'being-such,' which is neither a universal nor a particu-
lar, Nietzsche's affirmative 'yes' not said of a state of affairs but of its
being-thus. For Agamben, the State does not want singularities that do
not have an identity and cannot be easily controlled.
These reflections arise partly from an analysis of sense and Stoic logic,
and the introduction to Potentialites by Daniel Heller-Roazen even refers
to Gregory of Rimini's complexe significabile - the total signification of a
proposition, irreducible to the linguistic terms of the proposition or to
the objects to which they refer. Muralt (1991, 151) has suggested a rela-
tion between Poinsot's theory of enunciation and Gregory of Rimini's
complexe significabile. For Agamben, as for Deleuze, the Stoic lekton refers
not to a particular being but to the event of language itself. Agamben's
novel procedure is to consider that language expresses a capacity of
expression and that this leads to a consideration of language as the exist-
ence of potentiality, or of what it means to be 'capable.' Language is the
capacity to signify rather than an actual signification, and what is
expressed is communicability itself. For Agamben this leads to a political
philosophy by way of a reflection on what it means to be a 'political ani-
mal' — that is, the animal that has language. For if language is potential-
ity, the 'coming community' will not belong to the state but rather will
appropriate its own being-in-language, or belonging itself without
affirming a representable identity, and exist as absolute potentiality.
In a discussion of Derrida's terminology, Agamben argues that in the
semiotic scheme by which aliquid statpro aliquo, A stands for B, the inten-
tio must refer to the 'standing for' itself. He remarks that this is the rea-
son for 'the particular "terseness" of Derrida's terminology' (1999, 212),
in which one standing for stands for another standing for. The non-con-
cept of 'trace' is the relation itself. Deely makes a remarkably similar
point in the chapter on renvoi in New Beginnings, where he argues that
the classical formulation aliquid stat pro aliquo should be reformulated as
aliquid statpro olio: a sign is anything that stands for something other than
itself. This avoids confusing signs with objects; it also foregrounds the
relation or intentio of renvoi or referral, rather than a thing that refers.

138 The Primacy of Semiosis
Another recent work that merits attention is Rodolphe Gasche's Of
Minimal Things: Studies on the Notion of Relation (1999). In the valuable
introduction, Gasche notes that, following Aristotle's classical theory of
relations, it is in medieval philosophy that the topic of relation first
becomes a significant philosophical issue, and he follows the scholastic
definition of relation as 'being-towards-another' that has been the cen-
tral topic of this book. Gasche contends that relation is the essential
philosophical topic and that at the same time it exceeds philosophy, in
that it is more elemental or 'minimal' in a positive sense than any of phi-
losophy's defining concepts.2 However, Gasche never seems to establish
clearly the relation between signs and relations. The book itself contains
important treatments of Heidegger and Derrida, and it is this latter
thinker who might also be a subject of interest for those wishing to pur-
sue the relations between deconstructive strategies and the relational
semiotic that has been presented in this book - in particular, the ques-
tion as to whether Derrida's oeuvre in fact contains the concept of onto-
logical relation, or whether differance is rather a relatio secundum did
(transcendental relation).3
I make these brief allusions simply to point to what is as yet largely
unexplored terrain. Deely's Four Ages of Understanding (2001) provides
valuable material for engaging with these themes.4
In his essay 'Absolute Immanence,' Agamben (1999) also refers to
Deleuze and Guattari's What Is Philosophy (1994, 213), where he finds
'one of the most important passages of Deleuze's late philosophy, life as
absolute immediacy is defined as "pure contemplation without knowl-
edge."' I take this observation as a final way of indicating an effectively
new body of inquiry or emerging corpus of knowledge that may have
some life in it. In fact, Agamben contends that the 'coming philosophy'
will have to engage with the concept of life that Foucault and Deleuze
entertain in their final works, and construct a genealogical inquiry into
the term 'life.'
The passage Agamben selects from What Is Philosophy is this:
Vitalism has always had two possible interpretations: that of an Idea that
acts but is not - that acts therefore only from the point of view of an exter-
nal cerebral knowledge (from Kant to Claude Bernard); or that of a force
that is but does not act - that is therefore a pure intentional Awareness
(from Leibniz to Ruyer). If the second interpretation seems to us to be
imperative, it is because the contraction that preserves is always in a state of

Conclusion 139
detachment in relation to action or even in relation to movement and
appears as a pure contemplation without knowledge.
Agamben asks how it is possible to conceive of a desire that remains
immanent to itself - an absolute immanence that is immanent not to
something else but only to itself. I have written elsewhere (1997) on the
work of Raymond Ruyer, and on how Deleuze and Guattari take up his
concepts of 'absolute survey' (there is no brain behind the brain), equi-
potentiality, and 'primary true forms.' Here I want to reaffirm the
importance of engaging with these concepts, and concur with Agamben
that a genealogical inquiry into the term 'life' remains unavoidable and
constitutes an essentially philosophical and political task.
One possible avenue of inquiry that remains unexplored and that
offers extraordinary potential for mutual enrichment and distinction
between these different thinkers is a virtually unknown Argentinian/
German school of neurobiology and philosophy that has developed in
Buenos Aires over the past century. It is striking that in the same way
that the Hispanic scholastic John Poinsot was largely ignored for 350
years, this Argentinian school remains almost totally unknown to the
Anglo-American academic mainstream. I am referring to the work of
Alicia Avila and Mario-Fernando Crocco,5 which in fact does provide a
genealogy of life. What is more, this school is familiar with the work of
Raymond Ruyer, the neurophysiologist Karl Lashley (who coined the
term 'equipotentiality'), Deleuze, Kant, Poinsot, Heidegger, and Derr-
ida (among many other scientists and philosophers), and constitutes a
thousand-page thesis on what it is to be a finite person6 or psychism
(whether human or non-human) whose existentiality is not another's.
There is no English term for this 'condition' (i.e., for the fact that
one was not born in another body, family, or epoch), and the Spanish
neologism 'cadacualtez' ('each-oneness') should be distinguished from
Heidegger's subjectivist Jemeinigkeit (translated as 'my-own-owness' by
J.L. Mehta). Mariela Szirko defines cadacualtez as:
the constitutive determination of each person to both causally affect and
be causally affected by no other portion of nature - namely, such and such
a brain and its bodily and outer circumstances - than the portion which,
because of this determination, acquired the status that is called 'her': 'this
matter to which I am bound,' in Thoreau's words. Cadacualtez is one's
determination to sustain constitutive causal exchanges with a fixed portion

140 The Primacy of Semiosis
of nature, rather than one's existentiality having, instead, enclosed to any
other constitutive brain or circumstance.7
Or, in other words, the fact that as a finite observer, one finds oneself
thrown to experience 'one's' corporeal and historical circumstance
instead of another.
Another striking intersection is the one between Avila and Crocco's
Sensing and the recent work of Derrida (1999) on the question of man's
relation to animals - specifically, the presumption that animals are infe-
rior, and the denial of suffering and language in animals that can be
found in the philosophical tradition from Aristotle to Lacan, a tradition
which includes Descartes, Kant, Heidegger, and Levinas. Recall here
that Maturana denies suffering and language in animals. Deely, like Mat-
urana, 'denies' animals language (as distinct from communication) and
makes no explicit comment on suffering. In his Four Ages of Understand-
ing, however, Deely introduces the revolutionary point that the late
Latin analysis of ideas as formal signs would apply to psychological states
as such, cognitive and affective, both of which are found in animals
whether or not they are rational. On this interpretation, Deely's view of
what the medievals called 'passions of the soul' as formal signs would
bring not only cognition but also feeling and emotion under the rubric
of semiosis, an action of signs. From this it would plainly follow that all
animals are capable of suffering — another sharp departure of semiotics
as a postmodern intellectual movement from the main traditions of
modern philosophy, which tend to deny feeling to animals other than
humans.
Derrida, apparently unaware of Deely's work and its implications for
zoosemiosis, notes (1999, 291) that he has never come across any pro-
test by the 'great' philosophers - or by anybody who approaches philo-
sophically as such the so-called animal question - against the singular
general term 'the animal.' Derrida goes so far as to declare this homog-
enous term 'the Animal in general' one of man's greatest stupidities.
Particularly interesting is that Derrida notes (ibid., 300) that animality,
or 'the life of the living,' is currently defined as 'sensibility, irritability,
auto-motricity, spontaneity capable of self-movement [apte a se mouvoir],
self-affectivity.' He emphasizes that it is this auto-affection and relation
to self that is the characteristic of the living and of animality in general.
Furthermore, he notes that there appears to be 'an abyss' between this
relation to self ('ce Soi, cette ipseite') and the I of 'I think.' What is
interesting here (apart from the reflections on language) is that Derrida

Conclusion 141
recognizes the problematic term 'animal in general,' or 'the animal,'
which denotes a kind of neutralized group existence, but continues to
employ the term 'ipseity' to designate the self-relation of the living.
Avila and Crocco (1996, 501-3) specifically distinguish the Scholastic
notion of ipseity from cadacualtez. The scholastic ipseity (or 'standard
uniqueness') is a
'contraction' (in which it is akin to the Jain and Hinduist concepts of ahan-
kara) of postulated pre-existing constitutive principles, viz., ideal classes,
sortals, 'Types,' Figures of ontic feasibility, eidoi, forms, 'quiddities,' ontic
Formats, possibles, Templates, natures, or essences conferring generic-spe-
cific identity to the entities, whereby all identities are only simulated,
indeed produced by a deeper play or game as, to study identity, Gilles
Deleuze started with in his thesis on difference et repetition.
Ipseity cannot do justice to the distinction between 'a' fish or penguin
'species' and 'a' single individual, because all of them are deemed alike,
defined as simply the invariant of all its transformations (like autopoie-
sis). The term ipseity ignores the very quality Derrida seeks to empha-
size: that there are 'living beings' whose plurality cannot be grouped
together in the term 'animality' as opposed to humanity. 'There is a
multiplicity of living beings that can in no-way be homogenized except
through violence' (Derrida 1999, 298). For Derrida it is not a question
of 'giving speech' to animals but of thinking differently the absence of
the word - specifically, as other than a privation. According to Avila and
Crocco, Derrida Deleuze, and Heidegger have not adequately grasped
cadacualtez, and their work constitutes a unique laboratory of material
that deserves further exploration - if only to critique it - especially given
the importance of theories of pre-personal individuation for Deleuze.
Ansell-Pearson (1999, 185-8), in a section of Germinal Life titled 'On
the Advantages and Disadvantages of Deleuze's Reading of Uexkull,' has
also drawn attention to Deleuze's 'formalism,' in which all becomings
appear to be the same. In a manner strikingly reminiscent of Avila and
Crocco, he contends (ibid., 186) that Deleuze and Guattari are 'blind to
the specific ethology of the animal'; he goes so far as to write (ibid., 185)
that their work 'comes perilously close to philosophical idealism.' In the
Deleuzian scenario, 'the entire world is an egg'8 - but the egg is a
'staged theatre' dominated by Ideas or 'themes' (DR, 216) indicating un
jeu plus profond (a more profound game) of pre-existing constitutive
principles. The problem with such approaches is that they tend to be

142 The Primacy of Semiosis
'blind to cadacualtez — that is, blind to the incongruity of positing a
'standardized' logical uniqueness that does not distinguish between
being one and being not another. This approach may be adequate for
particles or quantum field events, but not for semovient 'persons,' be
they human or non-human, whose non-systemic uniqueness cannot be
exhaustively accounted for in this way. How cadacualtez, or non-standard
uniqueness, would differ from 'a more profound game' of difference
and repetition in which identities are 'only simulated, produced as an
optical "effect"' (DR, preface), is of course a story yet to be told, one in
which the actual circumstances of circumstantiation become constitu-
tive: 'Yet, since in persons contingencies become ontically constitutive
and, so, finite existentialities lack essence, for persons in no way the "dif-
ferance sans concept" is "1'essence de la repetition," a mistake in which
all those who grasp being as predication, in this case of a concept in par-
ticular, do fall along with those who inscribed the difference "dans le
concept en general"' (Avila and Crocco 1996, 506).
What is being argued is that Deleuze's ontology does not distinguish
between an electron and a person (or existential finitude), largely
because his ontology (with due reference to Sartre) is so impersonal.
You are just 'any-body' and interchangeable with your neighbours. All
electrons are the same, regardless of the time and place of their appear-
ance, whereas for persons the time and place of their embodiment or
circumstantiation becomes constitutive of their onticity. Persons, unlike
sand or cement, are not interchangeable - they are cadacualtic.
Does the A in Deleuze's 'Immanence: A Life' really do justice to a
non-standardized singularity or uniqueness? He seems to always empha-
size a pre-personal force when he claims that little children all resemble
one another and have barely any 'individuality.' They are traversed by a
singular, neutral essence: a life - 'pure power.' But what actually makes
one life not another life? Clearly not a standardized, systemic, or neutral
process of individuation. Deleuze emphasizes processes of individ-
uation, or 'deeper games' that do not presume already individuated
conditions (like a mould explaining a statue). The common interests,
convergence, and distinctions between pre-individual processes of indi-
viduation or theories of 'actualization' or 'emergence' and the cadac-
ualtez of Argentinian neurobiology may, at the very least, be unsettling
for our habits of thought. Self-movers all make use of the same physical
forces, but they are all unique, or cadacualtic. Neutral essences do not
make this distinction clear. Luce Irigaray (particularly in to be two
[2000]) seems to be one of the few contemporary philosophers to

Conclusion 143
engage with the question of 'irreducible alterity' in a manner that reso-
nates with the Argentinian school of philosophy and neurobiology.
However, Irigaray tends to base her ontology on sexual difference
(male/female), which is still too generic.
Given that Deleuze (1988b, 117) encourages us to constitute a meta-
physical image of thought corresponding to a contemporary molecular
biology of the brain, we have here much material for further articula-
tion within an ecology of practices that might allow for the emergence
of interesting novelty in creation, and that might disturb thought and
'suit' no one, this being the risk of relations or risky practices - we do
not always know what relations can do. We do not know what an ecology
is capable of. We might just have to engage with concepts whose exist-
ence we do not even suspect, or which we have become blind towards.
Thought might just have an interesting future creating and sustaining
new relations - perhaps the most elemental philosophical act.

This page intentionally left blank 

Notes
Introduction: The Drama of Relation and Its Characters
1 See Deely 1997.
2 Without wishing to enter at this point (or perhaps ever) into a complex
discussion of Kant's position on relations, let me simply note that Kant's
approach is distinct from a Cartesian one. As Deely has observed (1999,
66-7): 'With Kant knowledge is no longer the "simple possession of idea" it
tended to be with Descartes and Locke. Knowledge, and with it experience,
is made through and through relational, suprasubjective and not merely sub-
jective in its terminus.' However, as will very slowly become more evident,
Kant's relations do not have the peculiar, univocal ontological status that
would allow them to have intersubjectivity among knowers, or between know-
ers and 'things' of nature. In 'critical' thought no representation could ever
terminate in mind-independent being, or in something that is not changed
by being known. For Kant, we find ourselves in the objects of our knowledge,
and it is man himself (rather than God) who is the source of any order per-
ceived in nature. One of the emerging themes of this work is the escape
from the dualism of 'nature' and 'culture,' and from the scenario wherein
phenomena are the meeting place between inacessible things in themselves
and the categories of the Ego.
This work will ultimately seek to articulate a position (a la Stengers and
Latour) that does not claim a relation with Kantian 'things-in-themselves'
but rather the discovery and emergence of relational events that have little
to do with the imposition of a priori forms of understanding onto a silent
world and much to do with a richly articulated collective of humans and non-
humans in a process of conjoint becoming or copoiesis. To make this more
than 'metaphorical gesturing' will require more than a few lines of text.

146 Notes to pages 5-10
3 Two fine articles that emphasize the importance of external relations for
Deleuze are Hayden (1995) and Baugh (1993).
4 Deely's English translation of this seminal work was published in 1985 by the
University of California Press.
5 As Massumi notes (1992, 145), this is an 'antiphallic' image: 'Deleuze's
image expresses a desire to pervert the phallic function, in the literal sense of
"turning away from" (away from the "royal road" of the unconscious, as
Freud dubbed the Oedipal complex).'
6 As Heidegger (1992, 162) phrases the matter: 'The contention that there is
no longer a problem of knowledge, if it is maintained from the outset that
Dasein is involved with its world, is not really a contention but only the resto-
ration of a datum which any unbiased seeing sees as obvious. Moreover, it is
nowhere prescribed that there must be a problem of knowledge. Perhaps it is
precisely the task of a philosophical investigation ultimately to deprive many
problems of their sham existence, to reduce the number of problems and to
promote investigation which opens the way to the matters themselves.'
Deely often claims that the Heideggerian philosophy of being provides the
best example of an attempt to approach the requirements of a semiotic
account of experience. Deely also notes that Heidegger fails in this endeav-
our. One of the claims of this book is that an encounter between Deely's
post-Peircian, Poinsot-inspired semiotic and Deleuze and Guattari's work
provides useful tools for constructing existential territories that include non-
humans. It does not appear that Deely is familiar with Deleuze and Guattari's
texts, although he has written a book on Heidegger.
7 Deely will argue that Kant (a hypermodern Scotist?) does not have the
notion of ontological relation. His relations are always mind-dependent; so,
although he has an 'objective' world, it remains intramental or immanent to
consciousness. We can know nothing apart from our representations, which
are ideal. Kant does not have relations that can be simultaneously physical
(extra-mental) and objective. If experience is a texture of relations indiffer-
ent or 'external' to their foundation, then appearances or consequent phe-
nomena are not the meeting place between inaccessible 'things-in-
themselves' and the categories of the Ego. We enter into a different, more
'realistic,' world where this distinction breaks down, and there arise things
that are more and more in themselves the more they are for us. Appearances
all the way down (or around), but they are not nothing but appearances -
they participate in a collective that includes the knower. Not representations
of an unknown cause but, to use Whitehead's (1978, 237) terminology, 'a
cumulation of the universe and not a stage-play about it.' See also the con-
clusions of Andre de Muralt (1958, 193), in La Conscience trans cendentale dans

Notes to pages 10-20 
147
k criticisme Kantien, essai sur I'unite d'aperception: 'Kant is realist if one consid-
ers that he admits the possibility of things in themselves. But this realism is
a limit aspect of his philosophy. Kant is idealist because the only object of
knowledge that he recognizes is representation, that is to say, the subject'
(my translation). As Zourabichvili (1996, 44) notes, considered apart from
signs, thought appears like a simple faculty. However, this is an abstract view
in which thought only operates reflexively within the closed horizon of rep-
resentation.
8 Others do this much better than I ever could - for example, Olivier Boulnois
(1989,1990) on Duns Scotus. Note that Boulnois does not mention Poinsot's
'synthesis of irreconcilibles.' The present work has no pretention to being an
accomplished study in medieval thought. It simply plunders it. The bibliog-
raphy gives references to some of the contemporary master medievalists,
such as Andre de Muralt, Olivier Boulnois, and more recently Deleuze's stu-
dent Eric Alliez, whose work draws significantly on the above-mentioned
authors.
1: An Even Briefer History of Relations
1 See Constantine Cavarnos (1975) for a traditional academic presentation
that has the merit of at least emphasizing that Aristotle did have a theory of
relations, albeit an incomplete one: T do not see what Aristotle can be speak-
ing about, when he seems to be speaking about relations, except about rela-
tions. What are these strange entities?' (1975, 65). Cavarnos does not engage
with Poinsot's work and move from an ontology of relations to a semiotic.
2 Aristotle, Categories, 6a36-39. In Aristotle (1941, 17).
3 Categories, 8a28-34 in ibid., 22.
4 See Aertsen (1996) for a book-length treatment of the medieval notion of
transcendental. Particularly note the distinction between the medieval
notion of transcendentality - that which transcends the Aristotelian doctrine
of the categories - and the Kantian transcendental, which is concerned with
the categories of reason. The medieval transcendentals transcend the Aristo-
telian categories of mind-independent being by belonging to all of them, but
not in the sense that they refer to a separate reality 'beyond' the categories
(ibid., 93). Deely (1990, 39) notes that the medieval transcendentals were
sometimes called ens vagans- the vagrant aspects of being.
5 I am not attempting to give an account of Ockham's approach, which is
widely available. I am simply indicating it as the polar opposite of Poinsot.
6 Poinsot's ontology of relations makes the two categories of relation - tran-
scendental and ontological (i.e., relative beings and their relations) - prior

148 Notes to pages 20—1
to the division of being into substance and accident, which are themselves
subordinate to this analysis. More importandy, both these categories can be
experienced directly. All accidents (or attributes) can be experienced; and
since accidents are either transcendental or ontological relations, both can
be experienced: 'Experience gives these categories only in what will be called
accidents once substance has been rationally distinguished as a distinct cate-
gory or reality. Experience itself gives only, e.g., this white object, that sound,
etc' (TDS 469, EAIII. C.2 19).
This ontology of relations is strikingly reminiscent of Latour's (1999a,
151) observation that 'substances' are substantiated. We move from
attributes to substances. Pasteur's ferment began as attributes and ended up
being a substance- that is, a stable assemblage gathering together a multiplicity
of agents; or a concrescence.
7 That is to say (a la Poinsot and Deely), by understanding colours, sounds,
and so on, as signs bringing into awareness something other than themselves,
such as position, shape, movement... 'Sense data' are already relational prior
to habit and species variations.
8 Raymond Ruyer (1950, 15), whom Deleuze and Guattari draw on especially
in their final work What Is Philosophy? also criticizes James's 'neutral monism'
or 'double context' theory, which Ruyer claims can be summarized as fol-
lows: 'There's nothing to seek beyond sensation or pure experience. There is
nothing to seek either "in front" or "behind." Neither "in front": conscious-
ness designates a simple function, a group of relations established between
the different parts of experience. Neither "behind": the object is only a state
of consciousness; and between the colour as a psychological state and the
colour as worldly object there is only a difference of function. Concerning
this double thesis, we reject the second part, we think that "behind" the
object there is a being.' Deely also sees James as tied to the paradigm of
modernity in which what the mind knows is its own constructs.
9 As Hayden (1995, 300) notes in his fine essay, 'the most obvious adversary for
Deleuze on this issue is Hegel, although his critique is also directed to Plato,
Aristotle, and Descartes.' Russell, in emphasizing external relations, was
reacting largely against the British Hegelians (e.g., Bradley). James (and
Peirce) also takes up arms against Hegel (with whom, I might add, I am
totally unfamiliar). Deely has a more sympathetic approach to Hegel (claim-
ing that at least Hegel accepted the mind-independent reality of relations),
but affirms that nowhere does Hegel develop the ontological rationale of
relation as 'external' to its terms or, in other words, the peculiar indifference
of relation to its foundation - the fact that whether mind-dependent or
mind-independent, a relation is a relation.

Notes to pages 21-32 
149
10 Without wishing to overburden the text at this juncture, it is worth noting
that at a relatively early research stage, Deely (1972, 229) suspected 'that the
philosophical doctrine that all relations are internal is the result of taking
the transcendental relation as paradigmatic, while the doctrine that all rela-
tions are external admits only the secundum esse [ontological relation] para-
digm.' The slow elaboration of these terms will take some time, but a hint is
in order: remember the difference between relative terms and the actual
'ontological' relations they are involved in. 'Transcendental relations' are not
relations, they are relative terms. This is a pluralistic 'radical empiricism' that
allows for independence and relation.
11 For more on which, see Latour (1999a, 5-9).
2. Deleuze and External (or Ontological) Relations
1 As Hayden notes in his fine essay 'From Relations to Practice in the Empiri-
cism of Gilles Deleuze,' (1995, SOlnll), similar arguments were given by
Bertrand Russell when he contested the British Hegelians. Hayden cites as
an example Bertrand Russell, Our Knowledge of the External World.
2 See Hume, Treatise on Human Nature, Book 1, Part 2, sec. 4 (Everyman's
Library edition [London, 1911], 1, 52). Deleuze (1991, 99) cites this passage
as the proof that every relation is external to its terms.
3 Jean Wahl, who influenced Deleuze's reading of the British empiricists, had
made this observation (see 1948, 236).
4 Dialogues (first French publication 1972) was a series of essays written with
Claire Parnet. It provides one of the best introductions to Deleuze and
Guattari's work.
5 It is one aspect of Poinsot's genius that he reduced the Aristotelian catego-
rial schema to these two senses of relative being: (1) the fact that all beings
require for their intelligibility that they be considered in relation to things
other than themselves - that is, as transcendentally relative; and (2) the
actual relations or field of intersubjectivity - that is, the external or ontologi-
cal relations. It is Deely who must be credited for reintroducing (with some
difficulty) this forgotten distinction in the late twentieth century.
6 I am only trying to focus on one important aspect of a lengthy work.
7 SeeLecercle (1985,92).
8 See Eco (1984, 214-15); and Deely (2001, 96-112).
9 See Deely (1994a, 209); and Gasche (1999).
10 Drawn from Brehier's account of Stoic philosophy (1970).
11 Gregory of Rimini earned the nickname 'infant torturer' for his assumption
that children who died without baptism would suffer eternal damnation.

150 Notes to pages 33-40
12 This involves an incredibly complex set of issues that I am only beginning to
appreciate.
13 Muralt (1991), in what may currently be the finest study of Gregory of
Rimini, L'Enjeu de laphilosophie medievale, suggests that it would be interesting
to compare Gregory with the Stoics! He does not appear to be familiar with
Deleuze's The Logic of Sense (1990), although he also refers to Elie's Le Com-
pkxe signifiableHK providing a link between Gregory and phenomenology.
14 Deely's fine expression (1993, 264) in 'Reading the Signs: Some Basics of
Semiotics.'
15 Heidegger also clearly attempts such a reconfiguration with an approach to
Being that is neither 'subjective' nor 'objective' in the classical modern
sense. However, his phenomenology does not appear to have the necessary
semiotic awareness that would allow for Being not to be subordinated to rep-
resentation. (This concurs with Deleuze's criticism of Heidegger [see DR,
64—6.]) Deely makes a similar claim in his fine book on Heidegger, The Tradi-
tion via Heidegger (1972).
16 For Deleuze (DR, 35), 'there has only ever been one ontology, that of Duns
Scotus, which gave being a single voice.'
17 Deleuze will go on to argue that Scotus only thought univocal being, whereas
Spinoza affirmed univocity and Nietzsche realized it (DR, ch. 1).
18 This formal distinction is one of the most difficult subjects to write about,
and these tentative lines merely seek to indicate the barest outlines of what is
one of the most important steps in the development of modern philosophy.
For further analysis, consult Alliez (1999) and especially Wolter (1965).
19 I am basing this account on Muralt's commentary on Gregory of Rimini,
(1991,127-67).
20 Muralt (ibid., 130) quoting Ockam: 'soalae propositiones sciuntur.'
21 My translation.
3. Poinsot and Deely on Relations and Signs
1 It is impossible to discuss Poinsot without Deely, in that Deely has both trans-
lated Poinsot's Tractatus de Signis and been one of the very few contemporary
scholars to have extensively engaged with that work for a period of over
thirty years.
2 Augustine, DeDoctrina Christiana, Bk II, ch. 1, nl.
3 'De Signis,' being chapter 1 of their commentary on Aristotle's De Interpreta-
tione, in Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis et Societatisjesu: In Universam Dia-
lecticam Aristotelis Stagiritae. Secunda Pars. Lyon: Sumptibus Horatii Cardon,
pp. 4-67. An earlier edition minus the Greek text of Aristotle was pub-

Notes to pages 41-4 
151
lished at Coimbra itself in 1606. The English version used here is Doyle
(2001).
4 Pedro de Fonseca, Institutionum dialecticarum libri octo, 1564: lib. 1, cap. VI11.
Translated and quoted by Deely (1986a, 10).
5 Deleuze refers specifically to this aspect of Peirce's thought in Cinema 1
(1996,197).
6 It is interesting that Florent Gaboriau (1970, 131, translator's note), the
translator of the French edition of Heidegger's book on Duns Scotus and sig-
nification, draws attention to the importance of a study of relation as consecu-
tive to a study of action, and remarks that without this preliminary, words like
sense, or order, remain vague.
See also Heidegger's comment (1970, 125, author's translation): 'First of
all it is a matter of clarifying the notion of "sign." Significare extensive sumitur
pro dare itelligere [quoting Scotus]. Through the sign something becomes
objective to consciousness. In the notion of the sign there is thus something
relational... The relational character and the being-foundation are the
constitutive coefficients of the sign, and according to which the different
kinds of signs are also specified.' Note here the idea of objective being/esse
objectivum.
1 This appreciation of the univocal ontology of relations as external to their
terms is why Deleuze would have appreciated Poinsot.
8 As this analysis of intentionality progresses, it will become apparent (as it did
for Deely in reading and translating Poinsot) that the concept of intentional-
ity is derivative from the more fundamental concept of relation as 'external'
or indifferent to its subjective ground, be it posited as mind-independent or
mind-dependent. It is relation that allows for 'intentional' existence.
9 See Jean-Luc Solere (1989, 36). This article gives a good account of tradi-
tional Thomism. The form itself of intelligence is the thing as cognized. It is
not a representation.
10 Solere notes that for Thomism this mystery finds a parallel in the Incarna-
tion, since in Christ there is a union in one person without mixture of two
natures, the divine and human. Peiffer even takes this notion of 'mystery' as
the very title for his 1952 work on the subject.
11 Soheil M. Afnan (1958, 276) claims that the influence of Avicenna on
Aquinas 'could be considered the most serious and prolonged encounter
of Christianity with Islamic philosophy in Europe.' This is not without inter-
est when we realize the importance of Avicenna for Deleuze, Duns Scotus,
and Deely. It is Avicenna who initiates Duns Scotus' univocal conception of
being with the concept of 'being-as-first-known.' 'Neither private nor pub-
lic, neither collective nor individual... it is more terrible and powerful in

152 Notes to pages 45-51
this neutrality, to the extent that it is all of these things at once?' (Deleuze
LS, 35).
12 This account of species is based principally on Deely (1994a, 123-43) and
secondarily on Maritain (1959, 115-19). Deely's account of the notion of
species remains the most succint. He appears to be one of the very few con-
temporary semioticians (if not the only one) capable of understanding the
move from early Thomism to Poinsot's semiotic interpretation of the species.
The links to Alliez's comments on Duns Scotus and Maritain remain my con-
tribution. Deely does not refer to Deleuze and Guattari, nor should he have
to! One of the refrains of this book is that it can be interesting to read them
together.
13 For a complex historical account see Leen Spruit (1994, 1995). Although a
scholarly tour de force, Spruit's two-volume Species Intelligibilis does not men-
tion Poinsot. It is a brilliant example of a scholarly academic production that
almost drowns the reader in meticulous historical detail.
14 Without wishing to overburden the text, note that there were, for example,
Euclidean 'extramission' theories of vision in which 'visible rays' emanated
from the eye and illuminated the object. These extramission theories were
shown to be untenable principally by Avicenna, Averroes, and Alhazen. Here
again we note the enormous impact of Islamic thought on medieval Europe.
In fact, as Spruit (1994, 84) emphasizes, Alhazen's influence on the medieval
doctrine of species cannot be overestimated. For a useful account of the
revival of a modified Aristotelian theory of vision, see David C. Lindberg's
remarkable study Theories of Vision from Al-Kindi to Kepler (1976).
151 claim no originality here and encourage the reader to refer to Deely's text.
No plagiarism is intended. I will try to make it clear when I am supplement-
ing his account rather than merely paraphrasing. One point I will develop is
the great affinity between Duns Scotus and Poinsot. In fact, in the account
Deely (1994a) gives in New Beginnings, he places Scotus in the same position
as Poinsot in their understanding of the species. He does not elaborate on
this equivalence.
16 In Chaosmosis (1995, 22), Guattari's approach to 'subjectivity' emphasizes the
'founding instance ofintentionality. This involves taking the relation between subject
and object by the middle and foregrounding the expressive instance (or the interpretant
of the Peircean triad)' (my italics).
17 See J. Cronin (1966) for a treatment of Descartes's scholastic sources in the
Suarezian tradition, which Poinsot would have opposed.
18 Levinas, (1973, 41) understands Husserl's theory ofintentionality in away
that mirrors the Thomist approach; Husserl's idealism shares little with
Thomist intentionality other than the name.

Notes to pages 51-2 
153
19 Deely (1997, 80) uses the fine term 'Cyclopean Thomism' for a traditional
realist Thomism that has not grasped that the semiotic notion of 'objective
being' allows for realism but is not irreducible to it. Muralt (1991) presents
the most sophisticated attempt to distinguish traditional Thomism from Sco-
tism. Muralt is one of the few scholars other than Maritain (partially) and
.Deely (fully) to grasp the importance of Poinsot's semiotic synthesis, which
includes aspects of Scotism.
20 It will become apparent that this 'being of the between' is univocal and
grounded in the concept of 'being-as-first-known' developed by Scotus from
Avicenna. It is ultimately not between things already known (like a line
between already known subjects and objects), but between that which allows
for things to come to be known and that which allows for the question 'what
is?' Deleuze (DR. 65) claims that Heidegger 'gives renewed splendour to the
Univocity of Being.' I will not attempt to pursue the differences between
Heidegger and Deleuze in this footnote, except to say that Deleuze claims
that Heidegger does not go far enough in assuming the consequences of the
univocity of being. Deleuze also claims that Scotus only thought univocal
being, whereas Spinoza affirmed it and Nietzsche realized it. The point here
is that the questions we are examing were central for Deleuze and that Poin-
sot's semiotic is based on the univocity of relations. Mind-dependent and
mind-independent coincide univocally in 'objective being' because relations
are indifferent to the nature of their terms. They are 'external' or 'ontologi-
cal' relations. Nature and 'culture' interpenetrate in semiosis. This is not a
theory but a natural phenomenon. Scotism does not grasp the full importance of
signs as relations. It takes time for a semiotic to coalesce, and it would be
Peirce who ultimately achieved this coalescence in moving from the 'being'
of signs to their 'becoming': Autosemiopoiesis.
21 It is strange to see Scotus qualified as a nominalist, but as Peirce remarked,
the Scotist theory of formalities was 'separated from nominalism only by the
division of a hair' (Peirce, 8.11). Peirce, like Deleuze, was inspired by Scotus:
'There has only ever been one ontology, that of Duns Scotus, which gave
being a single voice. We say Duns Scotus, because he was the one who ele-
vated univocal being to the highest point of subtlety, albeit at the price of
abstraction' (DR, 35).
22 Capital Times (1996) is the published version of Alliez's doctoral thesis.
Deleuze was his thesis director, and, according to Alliez, Guattari was
involved throughout the production of the book. I note this because it shows
the relevance of these issues.
23 Alliez does not explain these terms in Capital Times, but he notes that Solere,
basing his analysis of intentionality on Aquinas, 'has no trouble showing that

154 Notes to pages 53-5
species escapes the orbit of classical representation and its aporias' (1996, 288).
Following a conversation with Alliez (Paris, 1997), it seems that he was aware
of the existence of Poinsot's work but not of the details of Poinsot's 'strange
synthesis.'
24 Maritain (1930) also develops these arguments in Reflexions sur I'intelligence
et sur sa viepropre. 'With Kant the beautiful monster born from this seed
achieves its full development' (ibid., 34); 'The Kantian revolution was an
historic catastrophe for Western civilization' (ibid., 36). He cites Poinsot's
expression for these scholastic deviations (Suarez, Vasquez): 'a strange aber-
ration - magna halludnatio (ibid., 67). As long as we don't recognize the dis-
tinction between entitative being and intentional being, we will be subsumed
by Konigsberg. Maritain always affirms realism against idealism. He never
fully masters the realization that Poinsot's semiotic is prior to these distinc-
tions, with the notion of ontological relation capable of signifying 'non-
being'just as easily as 'being.' The sign as a relation, be it 'mind-dependent'
or 'mind-independent,' is indifferent to its foundation. Realism as the possi-
ble coincidence between thought and thing is an insufficient image of
thought. 'Being-in-a-world' is more than this!
25 Muralt translates Poinsot directly from the Latin into French.
26 Gregory of Rimini took the object of knowledge to be a state of affairs, com-
plexe significabile (tanturn) - that is something that can only be expressed in a
complex way, for example, by a proposition, not by a term. This is opposed
to the significates of each of its ingredient terms. Gregory denied that the
tantum was either mental or extra-mental. Deleuze (LS, 19) claims that
Gregory was the second discoverer, after the Stoics, of 'sense as the fourth
dimension of the proposition' (in this Deleuzian scenario, Meinong was the
third discoverer). A 'sense' or 'event' that merges neither with the proposi-
tion nor the object: this is a Scotist treatment of the propositional logic that I
find isomorphic to Poinsot's specification of relations as univocal. Relations
have one 'sense': as relations they are indifferent or neutral with respect to
their foundation in mind or matter. Sense as a pure event... neither private
nor public, 'it is more terrible in this neutrality' (LS, 35). Deely, following
Poinsot, will demonstrate, like Meinong and Frege, how the object qua
object 'is distinct in principle from physical things and psychological condi-
tions alike ... But [in difference from Meinong or Frege, who seem to place
objectivity in an unqualified Platonic 'third realm'] the object qua object is
fully separable existentially only from physical things; it is existentially insep-
arable, though analytically and really distinct from the psychological condi-
tions sufficient for its existence - in the same way that concepts (ideas or
images) are inseparable from, though intrinsically other than, the neurolog-

Notes to pages 56-61 155
ical states sufficient to generate them' (Deely 1972b, 232). For Deleuze, this
is the brain become metaphysical surface. Deleuze's 'sense' is also not a
Platonic Idea. Through his use of Stoic logic, sense becomes a 'surface
effect' that is irreducible to physics without being abstract: 'Only empiricism
knows how to transcend the experiential dimensions of the visible without
falling into Ideas' (LS, 20); 'Univocal Being inheres in language and hap-
pens to things' (LS, 180). Deleuze's 'sense' arises from the univocity of
being-as-first-known: 'Sense ... is a pure sign' (LS, 176). Deleuze is particu-
larly inspired by the work of Pierre Klossowski, who in developing his own
semiotic 'borrows from scholastic philosophy as much as Husserl did, but
which traces its own paths.' (LS, 298).
27 This 'subtle' doctrine is inspired by Avicenna's notion of a 'common nature'
that is neither universal nor particular. Horseness is just horseness, neither
in things nor in thought. Like 'sense.' Scotus' doctrine of univocity, as well as
that of Poinsot, is inspired by Avicenna. As we shall see, the docrine of
'being-as-first-known' is also derived from Avicenna.
4. Umwelten
1 It seems that Sebeok was unaware of the attention given by Heidegger and
Merleau-Ponty to von Uexkull's work.
2 In Pandora's Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies, Latour (1999a, 21), sets
up an opposition between the postmodern, which seek, 'more absence, more
debunking, more negation, more deconstruction,' and the nonmodern,
which seeks 'proof of presence, deployment, affirmation, and construction.'
3 The turn 'non-languaging' will be developed throughout this chapter. At
issue is the extent to which animals other than human animals grasp the rela-
tion of signifaction as such. The argument to be presented here is that non-
human animals communicate but do not 'live in' language. They use signs
without knowing they are using signs.
4 In the following chapter we shall see that this is a critical issue for Maturana.
The frog does not 'aim' at anything: 'What the frog's eye tells the frog's
brain.'
5 Clearly, some will see this as a gross caricature of Kant. Nevertheless, it is
unclear how the Kantian subject learns about something other than itself
and how it escapes from a deep 'psychologism.' When a fly is trapped in a
bottle I do not create its prison, or the nature of its space, by being aware of
it (Ruyer).
6 There is a website dedicated to von Uexkull's work: http://www.zbi.ee/
~uexkull.

156 Notes to pages 62-3
7 In the following chapter on autopoiesis, we shall see that this autonomy cor-
responds to Maturana's concept of 'structure determinism.' A living being
does not have 'inputs' but responds to a triggering effect (or perturbation)
in a manner determined by its own structure.
8 Deleuze often refers to von Uexkiill's tick. Heidegger seems more fascinated
(or benumbed) by von Uexkiill's description of the being of the bee 'Beeing.'
9 Here 'meaning' is like Peirce's 'thirdness' - mediation or relation as an inter-
pretive process over and above dyadic physical interaction or 'secondness':
the connecting link of relations that are necessarily 'external' to their terms.
10 Gregory Bate son (1977, 241) affirms this in claiming that 'mental process'
(immanent to 'mind' and 'nature') is triggered by 'news of difference,' not
by energy. It is news of difference that is circulating - 'the pattern that con-
nects.' Bateson illustrates this with von UexkiiU's tick (although he does not
actually mention von Uexkiill): 'A tick on the twig of a tree waits for the
smell of butyric acid that would mean "mammal in the neighbourhood."
When he smells the butyric acid, he will fall from the tree. But if he stays long
enough on the tree and there is no butyric acid, he will fall from the tree
anyway and go to climb up another one. He can respond to the "fact" that
something does not happen.'
11 Deleuze and Guattari often refer to von Uexkiill's work. The following pas-
sage from Deleuze's The Fold (1993, 92-3) is worthy of an extended quota-
tion; it beautifully expresses the material we are engaging with and suggests
that the human monad can sink to a level lower than that of the tick:
The tiniest of all animals has glimmers that cause it to recognize its food,
its enemies, and sometimes its partner. If life implies a soul, it is because
proteins already attest to an activity of perception, discrimination, and dis-
tinction - in short, a 'primary force' that physical impulsions and chemi-
cal affinities cannot explain ... If life has a soul, it is because it perceives,
distinguishes, or discriminates, and all animal psychology is first of all a
psychology of perception. In most cases, the soul gets along quite well
with a very few clear or distinguished perceptions: the soul of the tick has
three, including a perception of light, an olfactory perception of its prey,
and a tactile perception of the best place to burrow, while everything else
in the great expanse of Nature, which the tick nevertheless conveys, is
only a numbness, a dust of tiny dark and scattered perceptions.
But if an animal scale exists, or an 'evolution' in the animal series, it is
insofar as increasingly numerous differential relations or a deepening
order are determining a zone of clear expression that is both more exten-
sive and increasingly hermetic. Each of the conscious perceptions that

Notes to pages 63-8 
157
comprise the zone is associated with others in the infinite process of recip-
rocal determination ... Few monads fail to believe themselves damned at
certain moments of their existence. When their clear perceptions are now
and again extinguished, when they recede into the night - in relation to
this the tick's life appears to be singularly rich. But with freedom there
also comes the moment when a soul is won over to itself and can whisper a
convalescent's astonishment, 'My God, what did I do in all of these years?'
12 This is the title of an unpublished article by Keith Ansell-Pearson (as well as a
term in Deleuze and Guattari's ATP, 314, which refers to von Uexkull). I
have appropriated parts of Ansell-Pearson's succinct account of the relation
between von Uexkiill's ethology and Deleuze and Guattari's work.
13 Maturana will call this mutual specification or contrapuntal relation 'struc-
tural coupling.' He once told me that von Uexkull had everything except the
notion of structural coupling, which is a more analytical and less musical
account of nature's 'harmony.' Varela's 'enaction' or 'embodied action' is a
version of von Uexkiill's Umwelt theory. Cognition depends on various linked
sensorimotor capacities (perceptors and effectors - a double articulation).
The organism 'enacts' or 'bringsforth' (taking up the Heideggerian Hervor-
bringen) a world.
Varela (in a personal correspondence) saw von Uexkull as having had a
'good intuition,' but dismissed his semiotic approach as inadequate in
accounting for the generative mechanisms of meaning that Varela, Thomp-
son, and Rosch try to engage with in The Embodied Mind (1991). In that book,
they quote Merleau-Ponty referring specifically to the concept of Umwelt
(174).
14 This seminar (dated 14 January 1974) is online at http://www.web-
deleuze.com/php/sommaire.html (accessed 24 October 2005). Kindly
translated by Timothy S. Murphy.
15 Consult DR, ch. 1, 'Difference in Itself,' for Deleuze's complex and original
propositions on the univocity of being. Deleuze traces a complex path
through Duns Scotus (thinking univocity), Spinoza (affirming), and
Nietzsche (realizing), which I will not attempt to engage with here. The
emphasis here is on the relevance of univocity to relation as such. Deleuze
likes grouping thinkers in threesomes. For a logic of the event it is the Stoics,
Leibniz, and Whitehead. For the logic of sense it is the Stoics, Gregory of
Rimini, and Meinong. Ultimately, in WIP, it will be Spinoza who constructs
'the best' plane of immanence - that is, one which does not give in to any
transcendent plane. A univocal plane - an abstract machine or rhizosphere.
16 For the 'serious' student, Alliez engages with Duns Scotus and the univocity
of being in his Capital Times (1996). I make no attempt to emulate his mas-

158 Notes to pages 68-79
terful account, which also refers to a fine article by Olivier Boulnois, 'Analo-
gic et univocite selon Duns Scot: la double destruction' (1989). The new
Routledge Encyclopaedia of Philosophy has a valuable entry on Duns Scotus writ-
ten by Barry Taylor.
17 Deely's classic account of ontological and transcendental relatives - that is,
the two kinds of relative being - can be found in Appendix 1 of his New
Beginnings, 'Contrasting Ontological and Transcendental Relatives' (1994a).
I base my account on his singular efforts. In chapter 6 we shall come to see
that this distinction is similar to Maturana's distinction between the 'rela-
tional domain' and the domain of anatomy or physiology.
18 See, in particular, Deely (1988a).
19 See Deleuze (1990, 34-5), for his reference to Avicenna.
20 See the afterword to TDS for Deely's brief discussion of Hegel.
21 My translation. Ruyer was aware of Jakob von Uexkull's work, which he
sought to free from its Kantian heritage. See also Ruyer's Neo-finalisme (1952,
217), a work that significantly influenced Deleuze and Guattari's final work
WIP: 'Note that von Uexkull, in his general philosophy (cf. Theoretical Biology,
Preface), is Kantian and confuses, as does Merleau-Ponty, comprehensive
biology and critical biology., For example: "All reality is subjective appear-
ance. This must constitute the one great, fundamental admission, even of
biology" (Preface). We take his "word" in itself, without reference to his gen-
eral doctrine.'
22 Karl von Frisch, Bees, Their Vision, Chemical Senses, and Language (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1950).
23 See Maritain (1957).
24 It is important to understand that an animal can be aware of 'absent signi-
fieds' (although it cannot pass on this awareness). The critical distinction is
that a non-languaging animal is not aware of what are in principle impercep-
tible objects, such as relations or linguistic objects.
25 I am encouraged to see that my interest in Deely's semiotic has infected/
affected Keith Ansell-Pearson's thoughts.
26 This univocal 'truth of the relative' rather than the intrinsically negative 'rel-
ativity of truth' (tied to a subject) will be engaged with in a later chapter. It is
the approach taken by thinkers such as Deleuze and Guattari, Bruno Latour,
and Isabelle Stengers, and in the actual practice of science.
27 This, of course, begs the question of whether robots or computers in their cur-
rently purely reactive form have Umwelten. We will get to this ...
28 Heidegger wanted FCM to be the first lecture series published in the Gesam-
tausgabe (Collected Works). It was first published in German in 1983 and
published in English in 1995. Nowhere else in his work does Heidegger

Notes to pages 79-82 159
engage so extensively with experimental science, in particular with the
Umwelt theory of Jakob von Uexkiill.
29 The most forceful criticism of Heidegger's biology lectures comes from Krell
in Daimon Life (1992). It is certain that Heidegger's approach is awkard, and
I am not seeking to defend his understanding. However, it remains a remark-
able attempt that cannot be dismissed out of hand. A semiotic approach
along the lines of Peirce and Deely offers a perhaps more nuanced avenue.
30 Deleuze and Guattari also significantly return to von Uexkiill's work in WIP
(183-6), suggesting that art begins with the animal, 'at least with the animal
that carves out a territory and constructs a house (both are correlative, or
even one and the same, in what is called a habitat).' This is a contrapuntal
theory of nature where nature and art become indistinguishable. The bower-
bird is a 'complete artist' (ibid., 184). Scenopoetes dentirostris. Alliez (1993, 94)
will seek to distinguish Deleuze and Guattari's approach to ethology from
Heidegger's phenomenology of behaviour and 'word-poverty' of the animal
by commencing with refrains, counterpoints, and expressive qualities; assem-
blages and becomings rather than behaviour - 'becoming-colours, becom-
ing-sounds.' A superior ethology...
31 The following chapter on Autopoiesis or self-production will take up this
question using the theory of the biologist Humberto Maturana, whose work
has a similar Kantian framework to that of von Uexkull and who, like von
Uexkiill, sheds light on a new paradigm in spite of his epistemology.
32 Michel Haar (1993, 160n8) notes (without any development of the relation)
that this proper peculiarity of self-production or autopoiesis 'would come
close to the notion of the "unified field" or "absolute domain" of individual-
ity or presence, which according to R. Ruyer (La Conscience et le corps) would
characterize life.' This is a truly interesting conceptual relationship, as
Deleuze and Guattari draw significantly on Ruyer's work, especially in WIP
and The Fold. For Deleuze and Guattari, following Ruyer, the organism has an
'absolute interiority' and the brain is 'a primary true form' or 'absolute
domain' in 'self-survey.'
33 In personal correspondence Deely makes the following observation:
'Remember that "relatio secundum esse," unlike "relatio secundum dici"
which has already the Latin one-word synonym "transcendentalis," never
acquired a one-word counterpart among the Latins. So my "ontological"
relation is a neologism for the purpose. The term occurs in Heidegger, but
not the concept, i.e., not the notion of the "relatio secundum esse" indiffer-
ent to the otherwise contrasting orders of what is and is not independent of
cognition. I have since wondered if there might not have been a better
choice; but what might it be still eludes me.'

160 Notes to pages 82-6
34 See Corrington (1994, 188) for further discussion of the difference between
human and animal Umwelten undertaken within a generalized Peirce/Deely
perspective: 'Human meaning horizons are not simply augmented versions
of animal Umwelten, but have distinctive features that radically alter the semi-
otic structures of the world.'
35 As Corrington notes (ibid., 188-9) traces of alterity/otherness within
zoosemiosis do not always constitute or generate apprehension of their
source, or involve conscious awareness of otherness. This requires an aware-
ness of relations. This is not in itself a judgment but a distinction.
36 Glaus Emmeche (2001) provides the most comprehensive discussion of this
question in 'Does a Robot Have an Umwelt?' The answer, for Emmeche, is no:
'Thus only genuine living beings (organisms and especially animals [as
active subjects]) can be said to live experientially an Umwelt.' The Argentin-
ian school of neurobiology (referred to in the conclusion to this book) will
take a different approach. There can be artificial substrates for 'persons,' or
active self-moving subjects, but purely reactive 'robots' will never, by defini-
tion, have experience. These observations require 'development' that will
not be undertaken here.
37 As Deleuze notes in The Fold (1993, 104), following Ruyer (and Whitehead):
'A great line of difference does not separate the organic from the inorganic,
but crosses the one like the other by distinguishing what is individual from
what is a collective or mass phenomenon, what is an absolute form and what
are massive, molar figures or structures.' Remember also that Haar (1993,
160) sees a relation between Heidegger's 'proper peculiarity' of the organ-
ism and Ruyer's 'absolute domains,' which Deleuze and Guattari draw on
particularly in their final work, WIP.
38 CP is the standard abbreviaton for The Collected Works of Charles Sanders Peirce.
39 This is one of the central claims of Francois Zourabichvili (1996) in Deleuze:
Une Philosophie de L'Evenement.
5. Autopoiesis and Languaging
1 This finite research project does not allow me to give Varela's current 'solo'
career as director of research in neuroscience at the CNRS, Paris, the atten-
tion it certainly merits. He has undoubtedly moved beyond Maturana's
observer-dependent approach with his project of developing a 'naturalized
phenomenology.'
2 Reprinted in McCulloch (1988). Included in that volume is McCulloch's
own essay 'What's in the Brain That Ink May Character,' in which he dis-
cusses Stoic logic and the lekton- 'something in the head like a fist in the

Notes to pages 86-101 161
hand'- a subject Deleuze takes up in the Logic of Sense (1990). Mary Cathe-
rine Bateson notes that Bateson refers to McCulloch more 'than any other
modern scientist' (see Bateson and Bateson 1987, 186).
3 Poster, in a recent commentary on Deleuze and Guattari, describes their
view in these terms: 'It is as if the earth itself were to describe the changes on
its surface in the course of human history, a vantage point quite remote from
the ego of the individual.' (1990, 137).
4 I am not presuming to give an outline of Leibniz's 'monadology' but simply
to explain briefly the relationship between Maturana and Varela's 'self-
contained' entities and Leibniz's 'windowless monads.'
5 Kant moves from a pre-critical position in which relations are ens reale (e.g.,
in his first published work Living Forces [1747] and in the important disserta-
tion Monadologia physica, [1756]) to the critical position where all relations,
be they spatial, temporal, or causal, are ens rationis or mind-dependent. Kant
does not grasp the univocal being of relations, which may be ens reale or ens
rationis depending on the circumstances.
6 The problem with Leibniz's monads is that relations cannot be ens reale; they
are reduced to a phenomenon, an appearance, or 'a mere ideal thing which
is nevertheless useful.' 'Thus Leibniz is forced, in order to maintain the sub-
ject-predicate doctrine, to the Kantian theory that relations, though verita-
ble, are the work of the mind' (Russell 1964, 14). Deleuze is aware of this
when he writes that for Leibniz, all relations are internal (WIP, 54). Deely
(1972b, 227) argues that the philosophical doctrine that all relations are
internal is 'the result of taking the transcendental relation (relation secun-
dum did) as paradigmatic, while the doctrine that all relations are external
admits only the secundum esseparadigm.'
7 Two useful introductions are Winograd and Flores (1988, ch. 4); and Dell
(1985). See also Mingers (1995), for a book-length treatment of autopoietic
theory.
8 In the ensuing presentation I will make use of substantial extracts from Mat-
urana and Varela's writings. It seems useful to give a feel for their manner of
expression, which will be unfamiliar to most readers and without which this
commentary would be difficult to evaluate.
9 Varela and von Glasersfeld (1987) have noted that although the literature on
perception was limited during Socrates' lifetime, he was nevertheless able to
demonstrate the subjective relativity of sensory perception with no difficulty.
10 Quoted by T. Sebeok (1979, 198).
11 Science as community-dependent concurs with Kuhn's (1970) 'paradigms':
'Scientific knowledge, like language, is intrinsically, the common property of
a group or else nothing at all.'

162 Notes to pages 102-113
12 Deleuze and Guattari (in a related context) characterize this change from
chemical trophallaxis to linguallaxis: 'What a curious deterritorialization, fill-
ing one's mouth with words instead of food and noises' (ATP, 62).
13 Does Derrida's 'textualism' have ontological relations or only transcendental
relations? But if ontological relations, does he realize the difference in status
between one and the same relation when it belongs to the order of ens reale
rather than to the order of ens rationis alone?
14 See Deleuze (1988, introduction), for a brief but admirable linking between
Bateson and Deleuze.
15 See Jacob (1973, 278, 289-90).
16 'Languaging' is a neologism of Maturana's invention meant to refer to the
act of being in language without necessarily associating such an act with
speaking.
17 See Maturana (1988) for his most detailed treatment of language.
18 Lecercle wrote one of the first books in English on Deleuze and Guattari:
Philosophy through the Looking Glass (1985).
19 Winograd and Flores (1987) have drawn parallels between the speech act
theories of Austin and Searle and Maturana's 'biology of cognition.'
20 Compare this perspective with that of Nietzsche (1968, §480): There exists
neither "spirit, nor reason, nor thinking, nor consciousness, nor soul, nor
will, nor truth: all are fictions ..." There is no question of "subject and object"
but of a particular species of animal that can prosper only through a certain
relative Tightness; above all regularity of its perception.'
21 To foreshadow Deleuze and Guattari's approach and indicate their unique
'style,' I have included some extended quotations in this text, especially as
the reader may be unfamiliar with their work: 'Once again, a whole intensive
map must be accounted for: the mouth as a deterritorialization of the snout
(the whole "conflict between the mouth and the brain," as Perrier called it);
the lips as a deterritorialization of the mouth (only humans have lips, in
other words, an outward curling of the interior mucous membranes; only
human females have breasts, in other words, deterritorialized mammary
glands: the extended nursing period advantageous for language learning is
accompanied by a complementary reterritorialization of the lips on the
breasts, and the breasts on the lips). What a curious deterritorialization, fill-
ing one's mouth with words instead of food and noises' (ATP, 61-2).
22 'For the operation of a living system, there is no inside or outside, and
it cannot make a representation of what an observer sees as exterior to it'
(Maturana 1988, 57). Self-conscious imagery arises with descriptions an
observer makes of his or her changes of state.
23 Roger Sperry is a Nobel laureate in medicine. For an account of his work on

Notes to pages 114-19 163
epilepsy and 'split-brain' experiments see Maturana and Varela (1987,
225-31).
24 See Sperry, 'Restoration of Vision' (1945), for the original experiment.
25 This essay, 'Biology of Self-Consciousness' (1995), is one of Maturana's more
recent published works and gives a condensed and fascinating account of his
approach.
26 Dissensus as opposed to consensus is a neologism of Guattari's invention. He
uses it particularly with respect to the domain of social ecology.
27 See particularly Dupuy and Varela (1992) for a discussion of the Derridian
logic of the supplement in relation to the self-referential nature of auto-
poiesis.
28 Their essay 'Brain, Language and the Origin of Human Mental Functions,' is
a condensed account of the approach of the Santiago School of Cognition.
The abstract deserves citing in full: 'We propose that to understand the bio-
logical and neurophysiological processes that give rise to human mental phe-
nomena it is necessary to consider them as behavioural relational
phenomena. In particular, we propose that: a) these phenomena take place
in the relational manner of living that human language constitutes, and b)
that they arise as recursive operations in such behavioural domain. Accord-
ingly we maintain that these phenomena do not take place in the brain, nor
are they a result of the unique operation of the brain, but arise with the par-
ticipation of the brain as it generates the behavioural relational domain.'
Varela (1999, 73) would refer to this brain as 'Dasein's brain.' The mind is
not a brain-encased self or 'skin-encapsulated' ego; 'it is in this no-place of
the co-determination of inner and outer, so that one cannot say that it is
inside or outside.' Varela (ibid., 77) uses language strikingly similar to
Guattari's in Chaosmosis (1995), especially when he claims that 'the mind is
not about representing some kind of state of affairs. The mind is about con-
stantly secreting this coherent reality that constitutes a world.' Also like
Guattari, he refers to Daniel Stern's studies of infant life: 'Being a "me" and
constituting a "you" are concomitant events' (ibid., 80). Guattari writes in
terms of the chaosmotic interface of subjectivity, secreting inferiority and
exteriority. Deely also uses the term 'labile interface' in his semiotic analysis
of the mind-dependent, mind-independent relation that occurs within an
expanded conception of experience that includes an interpenetration of
material and ideal elements. The 'mind' becomes a relational dynamics of a
body enfolded with the world rather than an entity with a location, the fold-
ing of an inside beyond any internal world with an outside beyond any exter-
nal world. Or the non-place where the world is not outside and the mind is
not inside (as in a vat).

164 Notes to pages 120-38
29 Quoted in Candrakirti (1979, 233): 'Neither self or non-self exist.'
30 This would be in accord with Peirce's contention that '"the question of the
origin of language" is one "which must be settled before linguistics takes its
final form," as against the Linguistic Society of Paris, which adopted as the
second article of its founding Statutes (1868.3) that no communication con-
cerning the origin of language be admitted into discussions of linguistic sci-
ence' (Deely 1990, 61).
31 See Austin (1962).
32 Carl Jung (1963, 4) seems to be one of the few thinkers to have made use of
this image, outside its technical botanical sense: 'Life has always seemed to
me like a plant that lives on its rhizome. Its true life is invisible, hidden in the
rhizome. The part that appears above ground lasts only a single summer.
Then it withers away - an ephemeral apparition. When we think of the
unending growth and decay of life and civilizations, we cannot escape the
impression of absolute nullity. Yet I have never lost a sense of something that
lives and endures underneath the eternal flux. What we see is the blossom,
which passes. The rhizome remains.'
33 This example is drawn from Massumi(1992, 24-6).
34 In his later work Foucault (1988, 19) remarked that 'perhaps I've insisted too
much on the technology of domination and power.' Foucault was ultimately
interested in how we constitute our identities through ethical techniques:
The Care of the Self.
35 See Eco (1988, 197-212) for a useful discussion of the historical change in
the meaning of denotation, which prior to Bacon was intensional rather
than extensional. Only in Anglo-Saxon philosophy since Bacon has denota-
tion been tied to external reference.
36 Deleuze and Guattari also speak of a 'body without organs,' that is, 'an
abstract machine.'
37 Fuzzy logic in advanced mathematics refers to a form of set theory in which
there is a gradual transition from membership of one set (collection of
'objects') to another. Both/and rather than either/or. Auto-focusing systems
in video cameras now incorporate elements of 'fuzzy logic,' which compen-
sate for a subject located off-centre.
Conclusion
1 Multitudes can be located at http://www.samizdat.net/multitudes
2 Gasche (1999, 11) gives the following examples of relation: 'Encounter,
arrival, address, contact, touch, belonging, distance, accord, agreement,
determination, measuring, translation and communication ...'

Notes to pages 138-9 165
3 'What is "old" (the sign) is still so new (as a relation secundum esse) that Jacques Der-
rida does not yet seem to have heard about it'; see Guagliardo, cited in Deely
(1994a, 150). The issue is whether Derrida has a notion of semiotic relations
as relations that are indifferent to their status as physical as well as objective,
or objective only. Does the Derridean 'unmotivated trace' achieve this indif-
ference? Given Derrida's acknowledgment of Peirce's seminal influence,
there is certainly a 'family resemblance' that Guagliardo (1994; 393n84)
seems also to acknowledge. Others with the required bent (of) mind might
seek to explore further this vein of inquiry.
4 Another useful relation is to Ferre's Being and Value (1996), in which he seeks
to 'understand' relations within an 'ecological world model,' and to his
Knowing and Value (1998), in which he seeks to develop a 'Scotistic' and
Whiteheadian theory of knowledge. Robert Cummings Neville, who
reviewed this latter book in Process Studies (28 [3/4] [1999]), argues that while
this is a remarkable work, Ferre has rather neglected Peirce's late-modern
'Scotist' semiotic, and as a consequence has not produced the 'gap closing'
epistemology he wants.
5 See Avila and Crocco (1996). A limited edition of this work exists in Argen-
tina. This school is based at the Centre for Neurobiological Studies, the Lab-
oratory of Electroneurobiological Research, and the Neuropsychiatric
Hospital 'Dr Jose Tirburcio Borda' in Buenos Aires. Its website is http://
electroneubio.secyt.gov.ar/index2.htm. A valuable essay by Mariela Szirko
that gives an overview of this tradition is 'Effects of Relativistic Motions in the
Brain and Their Physiological Bearing,'' available at that address. That essay will
be published in a forthcoming anthology, Ontology of Consciousness: Percipient
Agency, ed. Helmut Wautischer (MIT Press, 2006). The same anthology will
include an essay by Mario Crocco: 'A Palindrome: Mindful Living Creatures
as Instruments of Nature; Nature as an Instrument of Mindful Living Crea-
tures.'
6 'Persons' in this work are self-movers, or psychisms capable of initiating
causal series rather than simply continuing previous ones reactively. Persons
display 'semovience' and 'cadacualtez,' and have the capacity to co-create a
reality not bounded by fate or necessity. Avila and Crocco note that 'Semovi-
ence' is the Spanish term for the low Latin 'se movere,' self-moving. It
appears in the Romance languages c. 1100 and is used in the mercantile
trade to distinguish self-moving goods from movable and unmovable goods.
Monopsychisms and theories of emergence are 'blind to cadacaultez.' Alliez
(1993; 68) seems to hint at a medieval monopsychism in Deleuze and
Guattari's work that would be at variance with the pluralist approach of Sens-
ing which specifically denies any monopsychism as a 'myth' denying the

166 Notes to pages 140-3
finite reality of semovience and cadacaultez. To deny the plurality and fini-
tude of psychisms is a political act. The Argentinian school would see
Deleuze and Guattari's 'pure contemplation without knowledge' as non-
semovient, epiphenomenal, and passive.
7 Szirko, 'Effects of Relativistic Motions in the Brain and Their Physiological
Bearing,' see note 5.
8 Professor Mariela Szirko (electroneurobiologist and philosopher, Buenos
Aires) notes in a personal correspondence that this is a key monopsychical
Orphic formulation.

Bibliography
Aertsen, Jan A. 1996. Medieval Philosophy and the Transcendental^: The Case of Tho-
mas Aquinas. Leiden and New York: EJ. Brill.
Afnan, Soheil. 1958. Avicenna: His Life and Works. London: Allen and Unwin.
Agamben, Giorgio. 1993. The Coming Community. Trans. Michael Hardt. Minne-
apolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- 1999. Potentialities: Collected Essays in Philosophy. Stanford, CA: Stanford Univer-
sity Press.
Alliez, Eric. 1999. Les temps capitaux. Tome II. La capitate du temps, I, L'etat des cho-
ses. Paris: CERE
- 1996. Capital Times: Tales from the Conquest of Time. Foreword by Gilles Deleuze.
Trans. Georges Van Den Abbeele. Minneapolis and London: University of
Minnesota Press.
- 1993. La signature du monde: ou qu'est-ce que laphilosophie deDeleuze et Guattari?
Paris: CERE.
Ansell-Pearson, Keith. 1999. Germinal Life: The Difference and Repetition of Deleuze.
London: Routledge.
- n.d. 'Nature as Music.' Unpublished essay.
Aristotle. 1941. 'Categories.' The Basic Works of Aristotle. Trans. E.M. Edghill, ed.
Richard Mckeon. New York: Random House.
Austin, John L. 1962. How to Do Things with Words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Avila, Alicia, and Mario-Fernandez Crocco. 1996. Sensing: A New Fundamental
Action of Nature. Buenos Aires: Institute for Advanced Studies.
Baer, Eugen. 1992. 'Via Semiotica.' Semiotica 92 (3/4): 351-7.
Bains, Paul. 2001. 'Umwelten.' Semiotica 134(1/4): 1-31. Special issue on Jacob
von Uexkiill.
- 1997. 'Subjectless Subjectivities.' Canadian Review of Comparative Literature

168 Bibliography
24(3): 511-28. Special Issue, Deleuze/Guattari and the Philosophy of Expression.
Reprinted in Gary Genosko, ed. 2000. Critical Assessments: Deleuze and Guattari
in Three Volumes. London: Routledge. Reprinted in Brian Massumi, ed. 2002. A
Shock to Thought: Expression after Deleuze and Guattari. London: Routledge.
Bateson, Gregory. 1977. 'Afterword.' InJ. Brockman, ed. About Bateson. New
York: Button.
Bateson, Gregory, and Mary Catherine Bateson. 1987. Angels Fear: Towards an
Epistemology of the Sacred. New York: Macmillan.
Baugh, Bruce. 1993. 'Deleuze and Empiricism.' Journal for the British Society for
Phenomenology 24(1).
Bergson, Henri. 1975. Creative Evolution. Trans. Arthur Mitchell. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press.
Beuchot, Mauricio. 1994. 'Intentionality in John Poinsot.' American Catholic
Philosophical Quarterly 68(3): 279-96. Special Issue on Poinsot.
Boulnois, Olivier. 1990. 'Etre, luire et concevoir: note sur la genesese et la struc-
ture de la conception Scotiste de 1'esse objective. Collectanea Franciscana
60(1/2): 117-35.
- 1989. 'Analogic et univocite selon Duns Scot: la double destruction.' Les etudes
philosophiques 3/4.
Brehier, Emile. 1970. La theorie des incorporels dans I'ancien stoicisme. Paris: Vrin.
Candrakirti. 1980. Lucid Exposition of the Middle Way. Boulder, CO: Prajna Press.
Cavarnos, Constantine. 1975. The Classical Theory of Relations: A Study in the Meta-
physics of Plato, Aristotle, and Thomism. Belmont, MA: Institute for Byzantine
and Modern Greek Studies.
Conimbricenses. 1607. '"De Signis," being chapter 1 of their commentary on
Aristotle's De Interpretation.' Pp. 4—67 in Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis et
Societatis Jesu. In Universam Dialecticam Aristotelis Stagiritae. Secunda Pars. Lyon:
Sumptibus Horatii Garden.
Corrington, Robert S. 1994. Ecstatic Naturalism: Signs of the World. Indianapolis:
Indiana University Press.
Cronin, Timothy, J. 1966. Objective Being in Descartes and Sudrez. Rome: Gregorian
University Press.
Deely, John. 2001. Four Ages of Understanding: The First Postmodern Survey of Philoso-
phy from Ancient Times to the Turn of the Twenty-First Century. Toronto: University
of Toronto Press.
- 1999. The Best of Times ... The Worst of Times: The Way of Ideas and Where It Led: A
Pamphlet on Modernity. Houston, TX: University of St Thomas, Modern Philoso-
phy, Department of Philosophy.
- 1998. The Ethics of Terminology. American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly
72 (2): 197-243.

Bibliography 169
- 1997. 'Quid Sit Postmodernismus?' In Roman T. Ciapalo, ed. Postmodernism
and Christian Philosophy. Washington, DC: Catholic University of America
Press.
- 1994a. New Beginnings: Early Modern Philosophy and Postmodern Thought.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
- 1994b. 'A Morning and Evening Star: Editor's Introduction.' American Catholic
Philosophical Philosophical Quarterly 68(3): 255-77. Special Issue on Poinsot.
- 1994c. The Human Use of Signs or Elements of Anthroposemiosis. London and
Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
- 1993. 'Reading the Signs: Some Basics of Semiotics.' Semiotica97(3/4):
247-66.
- 1992. 'Philosophy and Experience.' American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly
66(3): 299-319.
- 1990. Basics of Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
- 1988a. 'The Problem of Interpreting the Term "First" in the Expression "First
Philosophy."' In John Deely, ed. Semiotics 1987. New York and London: Univer-
sity Press of America.
- 1988b. 'The Semiotic of John Poinsot: Yesterday and Tomorrow.' Semiotica
69(1/2): 31-127.
- 1986a. The Coalescence of Semiotic Consciousness.' In John Deely, Brooke
Williams, and Felicia E. Kruse, eds. Frontiers in Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
- 1986b. 'Semiotic as Framework and Direction.' In John Deely, Brooke Will-
iams, and Felicia E. Kruse, eds. Frontiers in Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
- 1986c. 'Idolum: Archeology and Ontology of the Iconic Sign.' In Paul Bouis-
sac, ed. Iconidty: Essays on the Nature of Culture. Tubingen: Stauffenberg Verlag,
29-49.
- 1982. Introducing Semiotic: Its History and Doctrine. Bloomington: Indiana Uni-
versity Press.
- 1978. 'Toward the Origin of Semiotic.' In Thomas A. Sebeok, ed. Sight, Sound,
and Sense. Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press.
- 1975. 'Reference to the Non-Existent.' The Thomist39(2): 253-308.
- 1974. 'The Two Approaches to Language: Philosophical and Historical Reflec-
tions on the Point of Departure of Jean Poinsot's Semiotic.' The Thomist 39(4):
856-907.
- 1972a. The Tradition via Heidegger. The Hague: Matinus Nijhoff.
- 1972b. The Ontological Status of Intentionality.' New Scholasticism 46: 220-33.
Deleuze, Gilles. 1997. 'Immanence: A Life ...' Theory, Culture and Society 14(2):
3-7.

170 Bibliography
— 1996. Cinema 1: The Movement Image. Trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Barbara
Habberjam. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- 1995. Negotiations: 1972-1990. Trans. Martin Joughin. New York: Columbia
University Press.
- 1994. Difference and Repetition. Trans. Paul Patton. New York and London:
Columbia University Press/The Athlone Press.
- 1993. The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque.KKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKKK
London: Athlone Press.
- 1991. Empiricism and Subjectivity: An Essay on Hume's Theory of Human Nature.
Trans, and with an introduction by Constantin Boundas. New York: Columbia
University Press.
- 1990. The Logic of Sense. Trans. Mark Lester with Charles Stivale. Ed. Constan-
tin V. Boundas. New York: Columbia University Press.
- 1988a. Spinoza: Practical Philosophy. Trans. Robert Hurley. San Francisco: City
Light Books.
- 1988b. Bergsonism. Trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Barbara Habberjam. New
York: Zone Books.
- 1972. 'Hume.' In Francois Chatelet, ed. Histoire de la philosophic. Tome 4. Les
lumieres. Paris: Hachette.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix Guattari. 1994. What Is Philosophy? Trans. Graham
Burchell and Hugh Tomlinson. London: Verso.
- 1988. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Trans. Brian Massumi.
London: Athlone Press.
- 1983. Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Trans. R. Hurley, M. Seem,
and H.R. Lane. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Claire Parnet. 1987. Dialogues. Trans. Hugh Tomlinson and
Barbara Habberjam. New York: Columbia University Press.
Dell, Paul. 'Understanding Bateson and Maturana: Toward a Biological
Foundation for the Social Sciences. 'Journal of Marital and Family Therapy 11:
1-20.
Derrida, Jacques. 1999. 'L'animal que doncje suis.' In L'animal autobiographique:
autour de Jacques Derrida. Paris: Editions Galilee.
- 1991. '"Eating Well," or the Calculation of the Subject: An Interview with
Jacques Derrida.' In E. Cadavar, P. Connor, and J.-L. Nancy, eds. Who Comes
After the Subject? New York and London: Routledge.
- 1989. Of Spirit: Heidegger and The Question. Trans. Geoffrey Bennington and
Rachel Bowlby. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
- 1974. OfGrammatology. Trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak. Baltimore and
London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Doyle, John P., ed. and trans. 2001. The Conimbricenses: Some Questions on Signs.

Bibliography 171
Milwaukee, WI: Marquette University Press. (Bilingual critical edition of Con-
imbricenses 1607.)
Dupreel, Eugene. 1968. Similitude et depassement. Brussels: Presse Universitaire de
Brussels.
Dupuy, Jean-Pierre, and Francisco Varela. 1992. 'Understanding Origins: An
Introduction.' In J. Dupuy and F. Varela, eds. Understanding Origins: Contempo-
rary Views on the Origin of Life, Mind, and Society. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Eco, Umberto. 1988. 'Whodunit? The Case of Denotation and/or Signification.'
Pp. 197-212 in Semiotic Theory and Practice. Vol. 1. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
- 1984. Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press.
Elie, Hubert. 1936. Le complexe significabik. Paris: Vrin.
Emmeche, Glaus. 2001. 'Does a Robot Have an Umwelt? Reflections on the Qual-
itative Biosemiotics of Jacob von Uexkiill.' Semiotica 134(1/4): 653-93.
Ferre, Frederick. 1998. Knowing and Value: Toward a Constructive Postmodern Episte-
mology. Albany: SUNY Press.
- 1996. Being and Value: Toward a Constructive Postmodern Metaphysics. Albany:
SUNY Press.
Foucault, Michel. 1988. Technologies of the Self: A Seminar with Michel Foucault. Ed.
Luther H. Martin, Huck Gutman, Patrick H. Hutton. London: Tavistock Press.
Gasche, Rodolphe. 1999. Of Minimal Things: Studies on the Notion of Relation. Stan-
ford: Stanford University Press.
Goodchild, Philip. 1996. Gilles Deleuze and the Question of Philosophy. London:
Associated University Presses.
Guagliardo, Vincent. 1994. 'Being-as-First-Known in Poinsot: A-Priori or
Aporia?' American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 68(3): 363—93.
Guattari, Felix. 1996. The Guattari Reader. Ed. Gary Genosko. Oxford: Blackwell.
- 1995. Chaosmosis: An Ethico-Aesthetic Paradigm. Trans. Paul Bains and Julian
Pefanis. Indianapolis and Sydney: Indiana University Press and Power Publica-
tions.
- 1979. L'inconscient machinique. Paris: Editions Recherches.
Haar, Michel. 1993. The Song of the Earth: Heidegger and the Grounds of the History of
Being. Trans. Reginald Lilly. Foreword by John Sallis. Indianapolis: Indiana
University Press.
Hayden, Patrick. 1995. 'From Relations to Practice in the Empiricism of Gilles
Deleuze.' Man and WorldZS: 283-302.
Heidegger, Martin. 1995. The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics: World, Finitude,
Solitude. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
- 1992. History of the Concept of Time: Prolegomena. Trans. Theodore Kisiel. Bloom-
ington: Indiana University Press.

172 Bibliography
— 1970. Traite des categories et de la signification chezDuns Scot. Trans, and intro-
duced by F. Gaboriau. Paris: Gallimard.
- 1962. Being and Time. Trans. John Macquarrie and Edward Robinson. London:
Basil Blackwell.
Hjelmslev, Louis. 1961. Prolegomena to a Theory of Language. Trans. Francis J. Whit-
field. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Hoffmeyer,Jesper. 1996. Signs of Meaning in the Universe. Trans. Barbara J. Have-
land. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
Irigaray, Luce. 2000. to be two. Trans. Monique M. Rhodes and Marco F. Cocito-
Monoc. London: Athlone Press.
Jacob, Francois. 1973. The Logic of Life: A History of Heredity. Trans. Betty E. Spill-
man. New York: Pantheon Books.
James, William. 1977. A Pluralistic Universe. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Jonas, Hans. 1965. 'Spinoza and the Theory of Organism. 'Journal of the History of
Philosophy 3: 43-74.
Jung, Carl G. 1963. Memories, Dreams, Reflections. New York: Vintage Books.
Kant, Immanuel. 1992a. Inaugural Dissertation: On Form and Principles of the Sensi-
ble and Intelligible World. In Cambridge Edition 1, Theoretical Philosophy, 1755-
1770. Trans, and ed. David Walford in collaboration with Ralf Neerbote. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
- 1992b. Thejdsche Logic. In Cambridge Edition 9, Lectures on Logic. Trans, and
ed. J. Michael Young. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
— 1985. Prologemena to Any Future Metaphysics that will be able to come forward as a
Science. In Immmanuel Kant: Philosophy of Material Nature. Trans. James W.
Eddington. Indianapolis: Hackett.
- 1978a. Critique of Pure Reason. Trans. Norman Kemp Smith. London: Mac-
millan.
— 1978b. Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View. Trans. Victor Lyle Dowdell.
Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern Illinois University Press.
— 1967. Kant: Philosophical Correspondence, 1759-99. Ed. and trans. Arnulf Zweig.
Chicago: Universtity of Chicago Press.
Klossowski, Pierre. 1998. Nietzsche and the Vicious Circle. Trans. Daniel W. Smith.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Krell, David, Farrell. 1992. Daimon Life: Heidegger and Life-Philosophy. Indianapo-
lis: Indiana University Press.
Kuhn, Thomas S. 1970. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Latour, Bruno. 1999a. Pandora's Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies. Cam-
bridge and London: Harvard University Press.

Bibliography 173
- 1999b. Politiques de la nature: comment faire entrer les sciences en democratie. Paris:
La Decouverte.
Lecercle, Jean-Jacques. 1985. Philosophy through the Looking Glass: Language, Non-
sense, Desire. La Salle, IL: Open Court.
Leclerc, Ivor. 1972. The Nature of Physical Existence. London: Allen and Unwin.
Levinas, Emmanuel. 1973. The Theory of Intuition in Husserl's Phenomenology. Evan-
ston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Lindberg, David C. 1976. Theories of Vision from Al-Kindi to Kepler. Chicago and
London: University of Chicago Press.
Locke, John. 1690. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. London: Thomas
Bassett.
Maclean, C. 1977. The Wolf Children. New York: Penguin Books.
Mari tain, Jacques. 1959. Distinguish to Unite, or The Degrees of Knowledge. New York:
Scribner's.
- 1957. 'Language and the Theory of Sign.' In Language: An Enquiry into Its
Meaning and Function. New York and London: Kennikat Press.
- 1930. Reflexions sur I'intelligence et sur sa viepropre. Paris: Desclee de Brouwer.
Massumi, Brian. 2000. 'Too-Blue: Colour Patch for an Expanded Empiricism.'
Cultural Studies 14(2): 177-226.
- 1992. A User's Guide to Capitalism and Schizophrenia: Deviations from Deleuze and
Guattari. Cambridge, MA, and London: MIT Press.
Maturana, Humberto. 1995. 'Biology of Self-Consciousness.' In Giuseppe
Trautteur, ed. Consciousness: Distinction and Reflection. Naples: Bibliopolis.
- 1990. Ontology of Observing. The Biological Foundations of Self-Consciousness and
the Physical Domain of Existence. Available at http://www.inteco.cl/biology/
ontology/.
- 1988. 'Reality: The Search for a Compelling Argument.' Irish Journal ofPsychol-
ogy 9(1): 25-82.
- 1983. 'On the Misuse of the Notion of Information in Biology. Comments
on "All things are full of Gods."' Journal of Social and Biological Structures
6: 155-8.
- 1980. 'Biology of Cognition.' In H. Maturana and F. Varela, eds. Autopoiesis
and Cognition: The Realization of the Living. Dordrecht: Reidel.
- 1978. 'Biology of Language: The Epistemology of Reality.' In G. Miller and E.
Lenneberg, eds. Psychology and Biology of Language and Thought. New York:
Academic Press.
Maturana, Humberto, Jorge Mpodozis, and Juan-Carlos Letelier. 1995. 'Brain,
Language, and the Origin of Human Mental Functions.' Biological Research 28:
15-26.
Maturana, Humberto, and Francisco Varela. 1987. The Tree of Knowledge: The Bio-

174 Bibliography
logical Roots of Understanding. Foreword byJ.Z. Young. Boston: New Science
Library.
- 1980. Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of the Living. Dordrecht:
D. Reidel.
McCulloch, Warren. 1988. Embodiments of Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mingers, John. 1995. Self-Producing Systems: Implications and Applications of Auto-
poiesis. New York and London: Plenum Press.
Monod, Jacques. 1971. Chance and Necessity: An Essay on the Natural History of Mod-
ern Biology. Trans. Austryn Wainhouse. New York: Knopf.
Muralt, Andre de. 1991. L'enjeu de laphilosophie medievale: etudes thomistes, scotistes,
occamiennes et gregoriennes. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
- 1985. 'Adequations et intentions secondes. Essai de confrontation de la
phenomenologie husserlienne et de la philosophie thomiste sur le point du
jugement.' In La metaphysique duphenomene. Les origines medievaks et I'elaboration
de la pensee phenomenologique. Paris: Vrin.
— 1958. La conscience transcendantale dans le criticisme Kantien: essai sur I'unite
d 'apperception. Paris: Aubier.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1968. The Will to Power. Trans. Walter Kaufmann and R.J.
Hollindale. New York: Vintage Press.
- 1962.KJHGHHGHGHGGHYUGHHJGHGHGHHJGGFHJHHJGH
ington, DC: Henry Regnery.
Paterson, F., and E. Linden. 1981. The Education ofKoko. New York: Holt, Rine-
hart and Winston.
Peiffer, John. 1952. The Mystery of Knowledge. Albany, NY: Magi Books.
Peirce, Charles Sanders. 1866-1913. The Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce.
Vols. 1-6, ed. Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss. Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1931-5. Vols. 7-8, ed. Arthur W. Burks (Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1958).
Perler, Dominik. 1993. 'Duns Scotus on Signification.' Medieval Philosophy and
Theology, vol. 3. Notre Dame and London: University of Notre Dame Press.
Poinsot, John. Tractatus de Signis. 1985. Arranged in bilingual format by John
Deely in consultation with Ralph A. Powell. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Poster, Mark. 1990. The Mode of Information: Poststructuralism and Social Context.
London: Polity Press.
Russell, Bertrand. 1964. A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz. London:
Allen and Unwin.
Ruyer, Raymond. 1964. L'animal, I'homme, lafonction symbolique. Paris: Gallimard.
- 1952. Neo-jinalisme. Paris: PUF.
- 1950. La conscience et le corps. Paris: PUF.

Bibliography 175
Sebeok, Thomas. 1979. The Sign and Its Masters. Austin: University of Texas Press.
- 1976. Contributions to the Doctrine of Signs. Bloomington and Lisse: Indiana Uni-
versity Press and Peter De Ridder Press.
Serres, Michel, with Bruno Latour. 1995. Conversations on Science, Culture, and
Time. Trans. Roxanne Lapidus. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Solere, Jean-Luc. 1989. 'La notion d'intentionnalite chez Thomas Aquinas.'
Philosophies. 13-36.
Sperry, R.W. 1945. 'Restoration of Vision after Crossing of Optic Nerves and
after Contralateral Transplantation of Eye.' Journal of Neurophysiology 8: 15-28.
Spruit, Leen. 1995. Volume 2. Species Intelligibilis: From Perception to Knowledge.
Renaissance Controversies, Later Scholasticism, and the Elimination of the Intelligible
Species in Modern Philosophy. Leiden: EJ. Brill.
- 1994. Species Intelligibilis: From Perception to Knowledge. Volume 1: Classical Roots
and Medieval Discussions. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Stengers, Isabelle. 2002. Penser avec Whitehead. Paris: Seuil.
- 1997. Power and Invention: Situating Science. Trans. Paul Bains. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
- 1996. Cosmopolitiques. Tome 1. La guerre des sciences. Paris: La Decouverte/Les
empecheurs de penser en rond.
Stern, Daniel. 1985. The Interpersonal World of the Infant. New York: Basic Books.
Varela, Francisco. 1999a. 'Steps to a Science of Inter-Being: Unfolding the
Dharma Implicit in Modern Cognitive Science.' In Gay Watson, Stephen
Batchelor, and Guy Claxton, eds. The Psychology of Awakening: Buddhism, Science
and Our Day-to-Day Lives. London: Rider Books.
- 1999b. 'The Naturalization of Phenomenology as the Transcendence of
Nature: Searching for Generative Mutual Constraints. Alter: Revue de Phenome-
nologieB: 355-81.
- 1996. 'The Early Days of Autopoiesis: Heinz and Chile.' Systems Research 13(3):
407-16.
— 1987. 'Cognitive Science and the Logic of Mirrors.' International Synergy Jour-
nal 2(2).
- 1979. Principles of Biological Autonomy. New York: Elsevier-North Holland.
Varela, Francisco, and Ernst von Glasersfeld. 1987. 'Problems of Knowledge and
Cognizing Organisms.' Methodologia 1: 29-45.
Varela, Francisco, Evan Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch. 1991. The Embodied
Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
von Uexkull, Jacob. 1982. The Theory of Meaning.' Semiotica42(l): 25-87. Spe-
cial Issue: Jakob von Uexkiill's 'The Theory of Meaning.'
- 1957. 'A Stroll through the Worlds of Animals and Men.' In Claire Schiller,
trans, and ed. Instinctive Behaviour: The Development of a Modern Concept. Intro-

176 Bibliography
duction by Karl S. Lashley. New York: International Universities Press.
Reprinted in Semiotica89(4): 279-315 (1992).
- 1926. Theoretical Biology. London: Kegan Paul.
von Uexkiill, Thure. 1989. 'Jakob von Uexkiill's Umwelt-Theory.' In Thomas A.
Sebeok and Jean Umiker-Sebeok, eds. The Semiotic Web 1988. Berlin and New
York: Mouton de Gruyter.
- 1982. 'Introduction: Meaning and Science in Jakob von Uexkiill's Concept of
Biology.' Semiotica 42 (1): 1-23.
Wahl,Jean. 1948. The Philosopher's Way. New York: Oxford University Press.
- 1932. Vers Le Concret. Paris: Vrin.
Weinberg, Julien. 1965. 'The Concept of Relation: Some Observations on Its
History.' In Abstraction, Relation, and Induction. Three Essays in the History of
Thought. Madison and Milwaukee: University of Wisconsin Press.
Whitehead, Alfred North. 1978. Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology. Cor-
rected edition. Ed. David Ray Griffin and Donald W. Sherbourne. New York:
Free Press.
Winograd, Terry, and Fernando Flores. 1988. Understanding Computers and Cogni-
tion. New York: Addison-Wesley.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1967. Philosophical Investigations. Ed. G.E.M. Anscombe
and R. Rhees, trans. G.E.M. Ascombe. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wolter, Allan B. 1965. 'The Formal Distinction.' In J.K. Ryan and B.M.
Bonansea, eds. John Duns Scotus, 1265-1965. Washington, DC: Catholic Uni-
versity of America Press.
Zourabichvili, Francois. 1996. Deleuze: une philosophic de Vevenement. Paris: PUF.

Index
accident, 16, 56, 67, 147-8n6
Aertsen,Jan A., 147n4
Agamben, Giorgio, 136-7, 138-9
Alhazen, 152n4
Alliez, Eric, 52, 147n8, 152nl2,153-
4nn22, 23, 157-8nl6; on ethology,
159n30
allopoietic systems, 88, 89
alterity. See otherness
animals, non-languaging, 69, 70-1,
73, 82, 140-1, 155n3; affective abil-
ity, 113-14, 115; apprehension of
world, 60, 69; awareness of absence
of object, 82, 158n24; awareness of
otherness, 82, 84, 160n35; aware-
ness of relations, 114; behaviour,
80-1, 159n30; communication be-
tween, 106-8; Heidegger on, 79-
80; as interpretants, 63; participa-
tion in languaging, 109, 119-20;
response to signs, 61-2, 62-3, 71,
72,158n24; sensory-motor determi-
nation, 113-14,115, 116; suffering,
60, 140; world of. See Umwelt
Ansell-Pearson, Keith, 71, 73, 141,
157nl2
apprehension, human, 70, 78, 83, 84
Aquinas. See Thomas, Aquinas, St;
Thomism
Argentinian school of neurobiology,
139, 142, 160n36, 165n5
Aristotle: on cognition, 44; realist
categories, 16, 17, 69; on relation,
15-16,17-18,10, 25-6,138,147nl;
on unity of being, 3, 39; on vision,
152nl4
assemblages, 8, 73, 87, 127-9
Augustine, on signs, 40, 41, 49-50
autopoiesis, 12, 80-1, 86, 93, 94,
156n7, 159nn31, 32; at cellular
level, 105; as cognition, 92; and
communication, 107; and genera-
tion of language, 93; and Umwelt,
85; Varela's description, 90-1
autopoietic systems, 88-9, 94-5, 99,
128-30; and autonomy, 129, 130;
organization in, 88, 129
Avicenna, 9, 39; on being, 66, 68-9,
83; influence, 44, 151-2nll,
152nl4, 153n20, 155n27
Avila, Alicia, and Mario-Fernando
Crocco, 139-41, 142, 165-6nn5, 6
Baer, Eugen, 71

178 Index
Bains, Paul, ix, 4, 5, 6, 8-9; book,
ix-x, 4-5; research potential, x, 5,
13, 138, 139, 143
Bakhtin, Mikhail, 104
Bateson, Gregory, 38, 73, 160-ln2;
triggers to mental process, 156nlO
behaviour, 12, 97-8; animal. See under
animals, non-languaging; and
structure, 97; unconscious, 114
being, 7, 133; analogical, 65-6; aware-
ness of, 35; categorial differences,
66; equivocal, 65, 66; mind depen-
dent, ix, 7, 9, 39, 69; mind indepen-
dent, ix, 7, 9, 69; minimal, 31;
objective. See objective being; pred-
erivative sense of, 68, 141, 142; pri-
mary focus of intellect, 66;
univocal. See univocal being
being-as-first-known, 66, 68, 83
being of the between, 51, 153n20. See
also univocal being
being-toward. See under relations
Bergson, Henri, 71-2, 115
Beuchot, Mauricio, 43, 46
Boulnois, Olivier, 147n8
Brentano, Franz, 43
cadacualtez, 139-40, 141, 142, 165-
6n6
Carroll, Lewis, 29
Cavarnos, Constantine, 147nl
Chatton, Walter, 36
Chomsky, Noam, 122, 128
cognition, ix, 11,12, 35, 39, 44, 50;
Kant on, 25, 61,155n5; Maturano's
definition, 92-4,101. See also species
colour vision, 95-6, 97, 100, 101. See
also sensory perception
communication, as social interac-
tion, 107
concepts, 11, 49, 154-5n26; Kant on,
23; and language, 56; as represen-
tation, 54; as signs, 5, 9, 10, 39, 40,
50, 52, 54, 55,140; subjectivity of, 5;
as univocal relation, 10. See also
ideas
Conimbricenses, 42; De Signis, 40-1,
150-ln3
consciousness, mystery of, 44
Corrington, Robert S., 160nn34, 35
DNA. See genetics, molecular
Deely, John, ix, 4, 55, 76, 78; compati-
bility with Deleuze and Guattari,
12-13; epigram, 133; Four Ages of
Understanding, 138; on Hegel, 70,
148n9; on Heidegger, 84, 146n6,
150nl5; on James, 148n8; on Kant,
22, 145n2, 146-7n7; Lebenswelt. See
Lebenswelt; on Locke, 46—7; objec-
tive world, 60, 76-7, 78; on Peirce,
70, 83-4; on Poinsot, 6, 42, 47-8,
150nl; on reality, 7-8, 9, 20, 21;
relations, ontological, 159n33; rela-
tion defined, 149nlO; relative
being, 75, 158nl7; on Russell, 20;
semiotic consciousness, 11, 20,
32, 67, 69, 75, 119, 163n28; sense,
logic of, 30; on species, 46, 47-9,
152nl2; transcendentality, 147n4;
on Umwelten, 60, 75-6, 82, 83-4; on
von Uexkiill, 57-8, 60-1, 74
Deleuze, Gilles, ix, 4; assemblages. See
assemblages; Difference and Repeti-
tion, 3, 34, 36, 73, 135, 141,
153nn20, 21, 157nl5; on Duns Sco-
tus, 150nnl6, 17, 153nn20, 21; epi-
grams, 3, 15, 59; on events, 31-2;
on external relation, 5-7, 8, 9, 20,
21, 25, 27, 42; TheFold, 160n37; on

Index 179
Gregory, 32, 33, 36-7; on Heideg-
ger, 153n20; on history of philoso-
phy, 6; on Hume, 25-6; on identity,
141-2; on Leibniz, 161n6; Logic of
Sense, 29, 84, 154-5n26, 160-ln2;
and multiplicity, 28, 73; on per-
ception, 120-1, 156-7nll; phallic
imagery, 6,146n5; relations define
being, 73; on sense, 29, 30-2, 33,
83, 134, 154-5n26; and social pro-
cesses, 117; Spinoza, 73, 113; on
the Stoics, 31; on univocal being, 7,
9, 64, 68, 73; on von Uexkull, 64,
156-7nll
Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix Guattari, 4,
165-6n6; on art, 159n30; content
and expression, 123-5, 127; epi-
gram, 85; event-centred ontology,
16, 73; language, superlinearity of,
111, 124, 125, 162n21; on linguis-
tics, 104, 121, 122-3; machine con-
cepts, 95, 97, 127, 128-9; order
words, 127; on organisms, 159n32;
relations, ecology of, 37-8, 73;
signifying systems, 104, 127; strata
of the organic body, 122-3, 124,
127-9; thought, 37; A Thousand Pla-
teaus, 6, 29, 72, 73, 79, 105, 110,
122-4,126-7,157nl2162n21; What
is Philosophy? 4, 38, 45, 57, 138-9,
158n21, 159n30, 160n37
Deleuze, Gilles, and Claire Parnet,
Dialogues, 21, 26-7, 28, 29, 149n4;
on Stoics, 31
denotation of language, 121, 128,
164n34
Derrida, Jacques: on animals, 140-1;
on Heidegger, 70; on relations,
138, 162nl3, 165n3; terminology
of, 137
Descartes, Rene: on ideas, 40, 47; on
objective being, 51; on representa-
tion in the mind, 43
dreams, 119
Duns Scotus, John, 4, 9, 10, 33-4;
being, 65-6; being of known in the
knower, 37,153n20; concepts as
signs, 39, 52, 55; and nominalism,
51-2, 153n21; objective being, 35,
37, 42, 50, 53, 56; on signs, 39,
151n6; on species, 152nl5; univoc-
ity of being, 34-5, 64, 65, 157-
8nl6. See also Scotism
Dupreel, Eugene, 129
Eco, Umberto, 164n35
ecology: generalized, 135; political,
135-6; of relations, 37-8
Elie, Hubert, 33
Emmeche, Glaus, 160n36
empiricism, 25, 26, 27; and multiplic-
ity, 28
ensrationis. See mind-dependent under
being
ens reale. See mind-independent under
being
esse objectivum. See objective being
ethical issues, 12,13,118,133-4, 136-
7; arising from mutual acceptance,
125; and languaging, 125-6
ethology. See behaviour under animals,
non-languaging
event, philosophy of, 16, 31-2, 73
experiential worlds, 7, 22, 74; Deely's
model, 76-7; semiotic account of,
146n6; trichotomous, 7,70; univocal
web of sign relations, 42, 57, 69, 75
Ferre, Frederick, 165n4
firstness. See apprehension, human

180 Index
Fonseca, Pedro de, 40-2
Foucault, Michel, 104, 117, 126,
164n34
Frege, Gottlob, 37
frog's eye experiment, 113-14; fly
catching, 114-15
fuzzy logic, 130, 164n37
Gaboriau, Florent, 151n6
Gasche, Rodolphe, 138, 164n2
genetics, molecular, 105, 111, 124,129
Gregory, of Rimini, 32-3, 149nll;
comparison with Stoics, 32,
150nl3; complexe significabile, 33, 35,
39, 55, 137, 154-5n26; object of
proposition, 36; on sense, 30, 35-6
Guagliardo, Vincent, 165n3
Guattari, Felix, 4,13; and autopoiesis,
12, 86; Chaosmosis, 7,11, 12, 32, 78,
86, 152nl6, 163n28; epigram, 85,
133; ethical issues, 134; on identity,
13; on manner of being, 82-3; on
relation, 5, 12, 152nl6; on subjec-
tivity, 78, 134. See also Deleuze,
Gilles; Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix
Guattari
Haar, Michel, 159n32, 160n37
Hayden, Patrick, 148n9; on Russell,
149nl
Hegel, Georg: on relation, 70, 148n8;
systems, enclosed, 8
Heidegger, Martin, 3, 4, 91; on being,
35, 67, 80, 83, 150nl5, 153n20; on
biology, 79, 158-9n28, 159n29; epi-
gram, 59; Fundamental Concepts of
Metaphysics, 70, 78-82, 158-9n28;
on knowledge, 145n6; phenome-
nology, 75; on signs, 151n6; on
worlds, 60, 79-81
Hjelmslev, Louis, 123
Hume, David, 5-6, 20; on externality
of relation, 25, 26, 149n2
human beings: ethical issues, 118,
125-6, 133-4; infancy and lan-
guage, 124-5; mental functions,
118-19, 163n28; as networks of
conversations, 112,117-18, 118-
19; and social systems, 117; struc-
tural change to bodyhoods, 111-
12, 124-5, 162nnl2, 21
human societies, 125; change in, 117,
127; communication without physi-
cal interaction, 111; culture, 126;
development of language. See under
language; multiplicity of domains
of existence. See multiplicity;
mutual acceptance in, 125
Husserl, Edmund, 30, 37, 43, 152nl8
ideas, 40, 48, 49, 51, 53; Locke's defi-
nition, 46-7. See also concepts
identity, 13, 16, 112, 129, 141-2; and
difference, 135
information, 105-6, 108, 128
intentionality, 43, 44, 57, 137, 151n8,
152nl8, 153-4n23; species as
medium for, 45
interest, 3
interpretants, 11, 50, 63, 78, 152nl6
ipseity, 140-1
Irigaray, Luce, 142-3
Islamic thought, influence of, 151-
2nll, 152nl4. See also Avicenna
Jacob, Francois, 105
James, William, 4, 19, 20, 148nn8, 9;
pluralism, 21, 27-8; A Pluralistic
Universe, 21
John, of St Thomas. See Poinsot, John

Index 181
Jonas, Hans, 21-2
Jung, Carl, 164n32
Kant, Immanuel, 4, 7, 145n2, 146-
7n7; categories, 16, 69-70; on cog-
nition, 25, 61, 155n5; on experi-
ence, 22; on ideas, 53, 154n24; on
relation, 16, 19, 161n5; on sense,
22-3; transcendental, 147n4
Klossowski, Pierre, 154-5n26
knowledge, 8, 12, 93, 146n6, 146-7n7
known in the knower. See objective
being
Labov, William, 104
language, ix, 32, 37, 84; and appre-
hension of Umwelt, 60, 69, 75;
autonomy of, 111, 124-5, 130; as
consensual, 102,104,110,115,130;
content and expression, 123-4; as
coordination of acts, 104, 111, 115,
128; and creativity, 130-1; denota-
tion of, 121, 128, 164n34; genera-
tion of, 99,104-5,108,110-11; and
internal dialogue, 118-19, 120; in
isolation, 120; and observation,
113; order words, 127; origins of,
121, 125, 164n30; and recursive
acts, 121, 122, 125; as relation,
12, 82, 102, 122, 127; and self-
consciousness, 12, 102, 108-9, 113,
115, 116, 118-19; as semiotic, 12;
and social forces, 104-5; as social
phenomenon, 115, 117, 122-3,
125; and the speech act. See speech
act; from structural coupling, 102;
transferability, 71, 72-3, 124, 130.
See also under names of philosophers
languaging, ix, 12
languaging acts: ethical meaning of,
125-6; social character of, 126-7.
See also speech act
languaging entity, 108-9, 162nl6
Latour, Bruno, x, 4, 60, 155n2; politi-
cal ecology, 135-6; realism, 9, 21;
substance, 147-8n6
Lebenswelt, 13, 71, 75, 82, 83. See also
Umwelten
Lecercle, Jean-Jacques, 29-30, 110,
162nl8
Leclerc, Ivor, 136
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von:
monad theory, 89-90, 161nn4, 6;
relations internal, 161n6
lekton, 30, 33, 36, 137. See also sense
life, 138, 140
linguistic domain, 108-9; communi-
cation between animals, 107; par-
ticipationLKKKKL
Linguistic Society of Paris, 164n30
linguistics, 30, 104, 107, 121,122-3
Locke, John, 46-7
Magnus, Albert, 41
Maritain, Jacques, 43, 52-3, 73,
152nl2, 153nl9; on Kant, 53,
154n24
Massumi, Brian, 123-4; epigram,
133
Maturana, Humberto, 4, 7, 155n4,
156n2, 157nl3, 159n31; animals
and language, 82; on cognition, 12,
92-3; on consensual coordination,
109, 116, 117; on culture, 126; on
Heidegger, 91; on information,
105-6; on language, ix, 102-3,122;
on objectivity, 103; on reality, 90;
on self-consciousness, 114, 163n25;
on social systems, 117
Maturana, Humberto and Francisco

182 Index
Varela: Autopoiesis and Cognition, 86,
89; autopoietic machines, 94-5, 99,
129; biology and cognition of lan-
guage, 85; cognition, 92-4, 101,
110, 118; communication, 107-8;
generative mechanisms, 99; lan-
guage generation, 87, 89, 99, 100,
102, 106, 110-11,121, 125; and
Leibniz, 89, 90; on linguistics, 107;
living systems, operationally
defined, 86-8, 93, 95-7, 100,
161n3, 162n22; living systems,
organization of components, 88,
89, 97-9; objectivity, 94; observer
description, 86-7, 90, 109, 116,
118; scientific hypothesis, 99; self-
consciousness, 87, 98, 102; sensory
perception, 95-6; signs as exterior
to organism, 105; structural cou-
pling 100, 101-2, 106; structural
determinism, 97-8, 100, 128
Maturana, Humberto, Jorge
Mpodozis, and Juan Carlos Lete-
lier, 119, 163n28
McCulloch, Warren
Meinong, Alexius, 30, 33, 36; extra
being, 32
metaphysics, 34, 66
mind, 119, 163n28
monism, 21, 148n8
Monod, Jacques, 129
Multitudes (journal), 136
multiplicity, 8, 9, 28, 73, 104, 112, 115
Muralt, Andre de, 146-7n7, 147n8,
153nl9; on Duns Scotus, 55; on
Gregory, 36-7, 150nl3; on objec-
tive being, 52; on Poinsot, 51-2,
53-4, 55
nature/culture dualism, x, 50, 67, 70,
75, 103, 145n2, 153n20; and signs,
103
nervous system, 85-6, 93, 95, 97;
closed system, 100, 113-14, 115,
116; and language, 111, 118-19;
relations not perceived, 119; sub-
marine navigator analogy, 86-7. See
also sensory perception
Neville, Robert Gumming, 165n4
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 6, 137, 162n20;
idea of the world, 90; social pro-
cesses, 117; on univocal being,
150nl7, 153n20, 157nl5
nominalism, 7, 19, 26, 31, 52, 153n21
non-languaging. See animals, non-lan-
guaging
objective, 60
objective being, 10, 35, 39-40, 50-1,
52-3, 77-8; intentional existence in
knower, 44, 52; as relation or event,
37; understanding of, 36, 42-3,
153n20. See also being
objective worlds, 70-1, 74, 75; Deely's
model, 60, 76-7, 78; threshold to,
82, 83. See also Umwelten
objectivity, 50-1, 94, 103; biological
impossibility, 96-7, 102; expressed
and signified, 37. See also truth of
the relative
objects, 10, 11, 35, 36, 45; in lan-
guage, 112; linguistic distinctions,
109-10; and relations, 28-9, 42,
134, 154-5n26
observation, 115; and language, 113
observers, 118, 122; descriptions by,
86-7, 90, 118; and imagination,
130; and information, 128; and
sign production, 121
ontogeny, 129-30

Index 183
ontology, 34
otherness, 84; awareness in animals,
82, 84, 160n35
Peifferjohn, 151nlO
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 4, 5, 19, 32,
33; autosemiopoiesis, 153n20; First-
ness, 83, 84; interpretants, 11, 50,
78, 152nl6; Scotist influences, 55,
153n21; semiotic categorial
schemes, 70, 78
Perler, Dominik, 55-6
phenomenology, 33, 43, 75
philosophy (western), 13, 51; history
of, 4, 6, 32, 33-4, 36; realist/idealist
oscillations, 4; on relation, 25-6
Piaget, Jean: brain and mind, 100; on
structure, 99-100
'plane of consistency.' See relations;
relations under language
pluralism, 21; and externality, 28
Poinsot, John, ix, 4, 5, 9-10; at Coim-
bra, 42; Deely as translator, ix, 6, 9;
objective being, 37, 42, 78, 154n24;
ontological relations, 6-7, 9, 10,
17-19, 26, 134, 147-8n6, 149n5;
relation and intentionality of
thought, 43; on Scotism, 51,
153nl9; semiotics based on univoc-
ity of relations, 38, 56, 153n20;
signs and relations, 9, 33, 42, 53-4,
55, 67, 68; on species, 48, 152nl5;
Tractus de Signis, 6, 8, 18, 19, 33,
54-5, 147-8n6
Poster, Mark, 161n3
postmodernism, 4, 6, 60, 118, 140,
155n2
propositions: neutrality of, 37; rela-
tion with the physical, 37, 39;
understanding of, 36-7
rationalism, 25, 28
realism, 4, 9, 21, 154n24
reality, 7-8, 9, 20, 21, 57, 90, 91-2;
consensual, 99; Kant on, 23; Mat-
urana on, 90, 118; mind-depen-
dent, 118, 163n28; mind-
independent, 35, 69; semiotic, 21
relatio secundum did. See relations,
transcendental
relatio secundum esse. See relations,
ontological
relations, 11-12, 66-7, 133, 138,
164n2; and being, 11, 57; being-
toward another, 11, 138; and cate-
gories, 69; event centred, 7; depen-
dence on mind, ix, 19, 20;
dependence on subject, 15-16;
externality of, ix, 3, 4-5, 28, 66-7;
human recognition of, 82; between
knower and known, 12, 50; respon-
sibility for, 12, 13, 133-4; and self,
11; signs as, 9; suprasubjectivity of,
11; triadic, 50, 70, 75; as web-like,
76-7; Whitehead on, 135-6
relations, concept of, 9, 20, 21, 35;
history, 7, 17-18, 19-23
relations, ontological, ix, 3, 4-5, 17,
18, 19, 28, 147-8n6, 159n33; and
categories of being, 67, 69; ecology
of, 37-8; and minimal being, 31;
and semiotics, 32; univocity of, ix,
7, 32, 66-7
relations, transcendental, 17, 18-19,
28, 67-8, 149nn5, 10
relative being, 57; and relations, 73;
transcendental, 67-8
relative terms, 17-19
representations, 10, 146-7n7; of
being, 35; and signification, 47,
54-5; and thought, 35

184 Index
rhizome metaphor, 122-3, 164n32
Robinson Crusoe, 120
robots and Umwelt, 83, 158n27,
160n36
Russell, Bertrand, 4, 19; on relation,
20, 136, 148n9
Ruyer, Raymond, 4, 71, 83, 139,
158n21, 159n32; on Helen Keller,
72; on James, 148n8
Santiago School of Cognition,
163n28
scholastic period, 39, 40-4, 50-1,141.
See also Scotism; Thomism
science, 158-9n28; as consensual real-
ity, 99, 161nll; as explanation of
human experience, 90; objectivity,
57; structural determinism, 98;
truth of the relative, 74, 158n26
Scotism, 3,10, 25-6, 34; on cognition,
50; on external relation, 26; on ob-
jective being, 35, 51, 153nl9. See
also Duns Scotus,John; scholastic
period
Sebeok, Thomas, 61, 75, 76; epigram,
59
self, 11, 108-9; generated from lan-
guage, 109; and internal dia-
logues, 120
self-consciousness, 87, 98, 102, 114;
arising from language, 12, 102,
108-9, 113, 115, 116, 118-19; as
social phenomenon, 115-16
self-production. See autopoiesis
self-relation, 141
semiosis, 5, 17; anthroposemiosis,
67, 69, 71, 76, 82; and categorial
schema, 67, 68; and language,
70-1; as process in nature, 60-1,
63; zoosemiosis, 60, 140
semiotic consciousness, 11, 20, 32, 67,
75, 119, 163n28
semiotic reality, 8, 9, 21, 57, 77; limit-
less, 68, 71; univocal, 68
semiotics, 31-2, 57, 71, 84; based in
univocal relation, 32, 69, 153n20;
of concepts, 5; of Duns Scotus and
Poinsot, 55; and experience, 69, 75;
nature and culture in, 67, 70,
153n20; postmodern, 140; termi-
nology, history of, 40-1
semovience, 142, 165-6n6
sensation, 48
sense, theory of, 29, 30-2, 154-5n26;
Kant on, 22-3. See alsoLLKKK
sense data: as semiotic, 20; as rela-
tional, 20, 148n7
sensory perception, 95-6, 97, 161n9
Serres, Michel, 9
signs, 9, 39, 40, 50, 53, 55, 75; debate
about, 40-1; defined by Augustine,
40, 41, 49-50; as exterior, 105; lan-
guage prerequisite, 121, 130; as
relations, 7, 9, 42, 49, 57, 67, 91,
134, 151n6, 165n3; and significa-
tion, 104,114,122,137; in thought,
135; transferability of, 71-2; trig-
gers for animals, 61-2; as univocal,
67, 68, 103
signs, formal, 10, 41, 49-50, 53; and
psychological states, 140; as subjec-
tive, 40, 42, 74. See also concepts
signs, instrumental, 41, 52, 53
social insects: structural coupling,
106-7; trophallaxis, 111
solipsism, 102
species, 10, 41, 44-6, 47-8, 56, 73-4,
152nnl2,13; expressae, 49; impressae,
46, 48-9, 50; as signs, 47, 56
species-specific worlds. See Umwelt

Index 185
speech act, 110, 121-2, 127, 162nl9
Sperry, Roger, 113, 162-3n23
Spinoza, Benedictus de, 6, 38; on
univocal being, 64, 73, 150nl7,
153n20, 157nl5
Spruit, Leen, 45, 152nnl3, 14
Stengers, Isabelle, 4, 135-6; epigram,
3
Stern, Daniel, 163n28
Stoic philosophy, 6-7, 29, 31, 137,
160-ln2; object of proposition, 36;
semiotic, 30; sense, 30-1
structural coupling, 100, 101-2, 106
structure: and behaviour, 97-8; gen-
erative, 98-9; of Piaget, 99-100
Suarez, Francisco, 47
subjectivity, 11, 50-1, 77-8
subject relation as attribute, 25-6
substance, 147-8n6
Szirko, Mariela, 139-40, 165n5,166n8
text, 71
textualism, 161nl3
thirdness, 42, 156n9
Thomas, Aquinas, St; on cognition,
44; on intentionality, 153n23
Thomism, 3, 10, 25-6, 151nn9, 10;
cognition and intentionality, 42,
43-4, 50; concept as formal sign,
52; objective being, 50-1, 153nl9;
realism, 10, 43; relation, 20, 26, 43;
on signs, 53, 54. See also scholastic
period; Thomas, Aquinas St
thought, 8, 37, 38,134,143,146-7n7;
and being, 35, 69; categorial, 65;
image of, 8, 51; intentionality of,
43; and realism, 154n24; and rela-
tions, 4, 8, 9, 143; as representa-
tion, 35; and signs, 135; as
subjective, 29
ticks, 62-3, 73, 113, 156-7nnlO, 11
Tournier, Michel, 120
transcendental relations. See rela-
tions, transcendental
transcendentality, 33-4
triad. See under relation
truth of the relative, 74, 103, 158n26
Umwelt sign theory, ix, 7,11. See also
semiotics
Umwelten, 7, 11, 60-1, 64, 70, 72, 73,
75-6, 77, 81, 114, 137; human/
animal threshold, 82, 160n34;
objective being, 60, 64, 74; reality,
91-2
univocal being, 3, 7, 9, 34-5, 36, 39,
64, 65, 68, 73, 153n20; apprehen-
sion of, 69; linguistic expression of,
69; pre-categorial, 67, 69. See also
being
univocity, 34-5, 37; of being. See uni-
vocal being; of experience, 74; of
relation, ix, 9
Varela, Francisco, 7, 12, 157nl3,
160nl; animal communication,
108; on autopoiesis, 90-1; language
as emergent property, 104; mind/
brain, 163n28. See also Maturana,
Humberto; Maturana, Humberto,
and Francisco Varela
vitalism. Seelife
von Frisch, Karl, 72-3, 77
von Uexkull, Jakob, ix, 7, 11, 32, 38,
57-8, 61, 75-8, 157nl3; influence
of Kant, 11, 64, 77, 96, 158n21; and
perception, 96; signs as triggers,
62-3
von Uexkull, Thure, 61, 63; reference
to Leibniz, 89, 91-2

186 Index
Wahl, Jean, 149n3 
Winograd, Terry, and Fernando
Weinberg, Julius R., 7, 15; Concept of 
Flores, 105, 162nl9
Relation, 7; on relation, 16, 19, 20 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, on language,
Whitehead, Alfred North, 4, 16, 146- 
60
7n7; prehension, 43, 136; on rela-
tions, 135-6LHHJHJHJKJHJJJJJKHJHJJJHJHJHJKHJJSJSJSJJKKJJJJJKDJ
William, of Ockham, 4, 7, 36; nomi- 
7n7, 160n30; epigram, 39
nalism, 18, 19, 33; realism, 47;
understanding of proposition, 36

